THE 


CANNABIS 
GROW BIBLE 



THE DEFINITIVE GUIDE TO GROWING MARIJUANA 
FOR RECREATIONAL AND MEDICAL USE 

Greg Green 



2 


THE CANNABIS GROW BIBLE 


© Copyright 2001, Greg Green 
All rights reserved. 

No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or 
otherwise, without written permission from the author. 



The Cannabis Grow Bible 

4th edition 


By 

Greg Green 




4 


Acknowledgements 


My thanks to my family and 
friends for making this book 
possible. This book is dedicated 
to growers all over the world. 

I would also like to say thank 
you to the members of 
www.overgrow.com and a really 
big thank you going out to 
-shabang-, The Penguin, 
Kryptonite, Strawdog, Slowhand, 
Chimera, BushyOlderGrower, 
Ralpheme, RealHigh and Vic High. 

This is a book about growing 
cannabis, written by people who 
grow cannabis. 



5 


DO YOU WANT TO LEARN HOW TO 
GROW POT LIKE THIS? 




6 



Picture by BushyOlderGrower. 




OR MAKE HASH LIKE THIS? 



8 



Picture by BiglslandBud. 



9 


THEN CONGRATULATIONS BECAUSE YOU HAVE 
BOUGHT THE RIGHT BOOK! 

PREFACE 


This book has been written under adverse 
conditions. In most countries it is illegal to 
own seeds, grow cannabis or use cannabis. Maybe 
it will change for you one day if you make the 
effort to have your voice heard. Until that 
day, it is recommended that you consult your 
local authorities to see what is your countries 
legal status with regards to growing cannabis. 
This book does not want you to break the law 
nor is it here for that purpose. This book is 
about cannabis and how it is grown around the 
world. Even though the contents of this book 
may show you how to acquire seeds and grow very 
potent plants, you are responsible for your own 
actions. We would like to see you grow cannabis 
however we would not like to see you break the 
law. 

I would also like to say that many 
countries have permitted medical users to grow 
cannabis in their home. If they have in your 
country then this book will be of massive 




10 


benefit to you and your health. 

The Cannabis Grow Bible is part of a 
foundation series and is a developing project. 
We listen too and talk with 100's of growers 
every single year. It is with their advice that 
we can offer you the latest updates on growing 
techniques and strains. 

The Cannabis Grow Bible is an information 
system. We hope that you stick with us and 
learn more about how to grow BIGGER BUD! 




11 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE 
FOREWORD 
Chapter 1 : 

THE CANNABIS PLANT: A BRIEF HISTORY OF 
CANNABIS AND THE BASICS OF USING 

CANNABIS. 

-HOW CANNABIS IS USED 
-SPECIES 
-THC 

-ZERO ZERO 
-RESIN 
-THE HIGH 


Chapter 2 : 
SEEDS 


- SEEDS 

- HOW TO GET SEEDS 




12 


- CHOOSING A SEED-BANK 
- WHAT TO LOOK FOR IN CHOOSING SEEDS 
- GROWING FACTORS 

- THE LIFE CYCLE OF THE MARIJUANA PLANT 
- FLOWERING NON-POLLINATED FEMALES (SINSEMILLA CROP): 

-CYCLE TIMES 

Chapter 3 : 

PROPAGATION 

-WAYS TO GERMINATE YOUR SEEDS 
-DANGERS WHEN PROPAGATING SEEDS 
-TRANSPLANTING 
-GERMINATION SOIL 
-INDOOR AND OUTDOOR GROWING 
-GENERAL INDOOR GROWING 
-GENERAL OUTDOOR GROWING AND GUERRILLA FARMING 

-GARDENING TOOLS 
-MALE POTENCY 
-SCUFFING SEEDS 

Chapter 4 : 

SECURITY 

-SECURITY 
-INDOOR SECURITY 
-OUTDOOR SECURITY 




13 


-GUERRILLA GROWING SECURITY 


Chapter 5 : 

THE INDOOR GROWING OF CANNABIS 

-LIGHTS 
-LIGHT BANDS 
-POOR LIGHTING SYSTEMS 
-AVERAGE LIGHTING SYSTEMS 
-BEST LIGHTING SYSTEMS 
-HORTICULTURAL LIGHTS - HID 
-WHAT TO LOOK FOR WHEN BUYING A LIGHT. 
-WATTAGE AND LUMENS 
-LUMENS AND MARIJUANA GROWING 
-LIGHTING FACTORS AND HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM YOUR 

LIGHT 

-SOIL 

-pH 

-NUTRIENTS 

-SOME COMMON SOIL TYPES 
-POTS 

-CONTINUING YOUR INDOOR SOIL GROW 
-INDOOR VEGETATIVE GROWTH 
-WATERING 

-ADJUSTING YOU LIGHTS 




14 


Chapter 6 : 

THE BASICS OF INDOOR ENVIRONMENTAL 

CONTROL 

-SOIL CONTROL 
-ph CONTROL 
-SOIL FLUSHING 
-NUTRIENT CONTROL 
-FEEDING 
-AIR 

-HUMIDITY 

-TEMPERATURE 

-FANS 

Chapter 7 : 

PRE-FLOWERING AND FLOWERING 

-THE END OF VEGETATIVE GROWTH 
-PRE-FLOWERING 
-EARLY SEXING METHODS 
-WHEN TO FLOWER 
-THE ALL IMPORTANT 12/12 
-PROBLEMS WITH 12/12 
-HOW TO SEX YOUR PLANTS 
-HERMAPHRODITES 




15 


-FLOWERING 


Chapter 8 : 

ADVANCED INDOOR SOIL 
BASED GROW METHODS 

-SOG 

-ScrOG 

-CABINET GROWING 
-ADVANCED SET-UPS 
-PERPETUAL GROW CYCLE 

Chapter 9 : 

BASIC HYDROPONICS 

- THE GROWER AND THE GROWING MEDIUM 
- HYDROPONICS SET-UPS 
-HYDROPONICS NUTRIENTS 
-HYDROPONICS GROWING MEDIUMS 
-CANNABIS AND HYDROPONICS 
-THE BUBBLER 




16 


Chapter 10 : 
OUTDOOR GROWING 

-THE GROWER AND THE GREAT OUTDOORS 
-CARING FOR OUTDOOR PLANTS 

Chapter 11 : 

THE BASICS OF PLANT CARE 

-THINNING 
-LIGHT BENDING 
-PRUNING 
-BUSHES 
-TRAINING 
-INCREASING YIELD 

Chapter 12 : 

PREDATORS AND PESTS 

-INDEX OF PESTS 
-CLEANING THE GROW ROOM 




17 


Chapter 13 : 
PROBLEM SOLVER 


- PLANT PROBLEMS AND HOW TO SOLVE THEM 
- POT-BOUND AND ROOT-BOUND 
-LOCKOUT 
-BAD GENETICS 

Chapter 14: 

HARVESTING AND CURING YOUR BUD 

- INDICA HARVEST 
-SATIVA HARVEST 
-FAN LEAVES, LEAVES AND TRIM 
-CURING 


Chapter 15: 

BREEDING 

- MAKING SEEDS 
-POLLEN 

-SIMPLE BREEDING 

-HOW TO CONTINUE A STRAIN THROUGH SEED 
-HOW TO MAKE A SIMPLE HYBRID 




18 


-AN INTRODUCTION INTO BASIC GENETICS 
-GENE PAIRS 

-DOMINANT AND RECESSIVE 
-MODIFYING GENES 
-PARTIAL DOMINANCE 
-HARDY-WEINBERG EQUILIBRIUM 
-THE TEST CROSS 

-HARDY-WEINBERG EQUILIBRIUM PART 2 
-HOW TO TRUE BREED A STRAIN 
-CUBING AND BACKCROSSING 
-SELFING 


Chapter 16: 
STRAIN INDEX 


Chapter 17: 

HOW TO MAKE HASH 

- HOW TO GATHER THE STALKED CAPITATE TRICHOMES 

-SKUFF 

-BASICS OF SCREENING 
-PROPER SCREENING METHODS 
-HOW TO PRESS SKUFF INTO HASH 




19 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
INDEX 




20 


FOREWORD 

The book is a grow bible. There is still 
much work that needs to be done to provide 
something that is truly of bible size, but that 
will come in time. The reason why I know this 
is because cannabis suppression has suspended 
cannabis information gathering over the past 60 
years. I can safely say that you can find books 
on Roses that are 10 times thicker than this 
book with heaps more information. Roses are not 
illegal in most countries, so scientists are 
free to explore the Rose. Sadly the same can 
not be said for cannabis.until now. 

The Cannabis Grow Bible (CGB for short) is 
new. New, in that the book is one of a kind. 
Those who are willing to take serious risks in 
getting you this information have discovered 
most of what you will read and learn here. It 
is fine and easy for me to compile the book and 
write it. I am not at risk by printing this 
book, but those who grew out hundreds of plants 
in their basement to provide me with raw data 
on this subject matter are at risk. It is with 
their help that they have been able to help me 
parse what is real and what is not in the world 





21 


of growing cannabis. They have helped take 
facts and figures and use these to put together 
a book that would truly help someone grow 
bigger buds. The result has been outstanding 
and I am very thankful for what they did. 

In this book you will learn a number of 
things. Probably too many to remember all in 
one go if this is your first time growing. That 
is why I have broken the book into easy step by 
step portions. The book runs from start to 
finish just like a growing plant would. So you 
can imagine the life cycle of the cannabis 
plant being the foundation for the style and 
layout of this book. This is what makes the 
book work. It is part essay / part science. Too 
many books do not cover the science very well 
and others do not cover the practical side very 
well. Here you will meet both worlds as one. 

There are some simple things you need to 
grow a cannabis plant and this book will 
explain all those things to you, but there are 
other things you need to know to grow a super 
cannabis plant and this is where the book helps 
too, but it does not cross the two elements 
over which can sometimes confuse the reader. 




22 


The book will clearly define what you can or 
can not do, but most of the time this has 
nothing to do with your growing experience. It 
has more to do with how much money you are 
willing to spend, what cannabis strains you 
have, and where you are growing. 

A grower is not limited by their growing 
experience. A grower is limited by law, space, 
money, information and good genetics. We can 
not help you with money, space and the law, but 
we can help you with growing information and we 
can tell you where to obtain good genetics. 

Don’t ever let bad results hamper your new 
hobby. That is part of the process of learning. 
However, this book will point out some mistakes 
that people have made, so you don’t have to 
repeat them and learn the hard way. 

Glance over this book and flick through the 
chapters. Get an air of what is going on. Then 
read it all from start to finish. By the time 
you turn the last page, you will probably have 
a bit of your own home grown bud in a pipe. If 
you can do that then tell people about this 
book. It is our goal to get everyone 
participating in growing the great herb. 




23 


This is not the final book on the subject 
either. This book has been designed in such a 
way that the book will grow on a yearly basis. 
We will be adding new chapters, new pictures, 
new methods and new theories every year. That 
is why the cannabis grow bible has become the 
growers handbook of choice. 

We hope that you stick with us and we hope 
that this book will help you to get where you 
want to go. Happy growing and most of all 
remember to. 

...HAVE FUN! 


Greg Green. 





24 


The Cannabis Grow Bible 
By Greg Green 

"Since it's inception marijuana is natural. Given by God for all living 
creatures to use. Let peace and sanity prevail, let the herb grow free. 
There is no finer hobby on this planet, than tending to a garden that 
gives such delightful rewards." - Greg Green. 




25 


Chapter 1 


THE CANNABIS PLANT: A BRIEF HISTORY OF 
CANNABIS AND THE BASICS OF USING CANNABIS. 



This picture is of a young female Skunk#l plant 
developing her flower cluster. This picture is from 

Strawdog. 


Cannabis plants have been living on this 
planet for thousands, maybe millions of years, 
and have been doing so for quite some time 
before man's intervention and after. Cannabis 
can grow nearly everywhere and anywhere as long 





26 


as the temperature is not too low and there is 
enough sunlight and food present for the plant 
to flourish. In Asia, one can travel to the 
various regions around Mongolia and visit the 
cannabis plant naturally growing on the 
hillsides and across the vast plains, sometimes 
covering entire hill faces and spreading down 
onto the valley below. The Cannabis plant is a 
very adaptable plant and can grow both in and 
outdoors. 

The Cannabis plant has managed to travel 
across the globe without the help of man. The 
seed has been carried by the wind, in bird 
droppings and has attached itself to animals 
that can, and do, trek over long distances. 

As you can see Mother Nature has distributed 
this plant in many ways. 

The origins of the Cannabis plant are not 
entirely clear but today it is generally 
recognized by most biologists and cannabis 
researchers that it began it's life somewhere 
in the Himalayas (Figure 1.1). 




27 


V / TAJfhesrfAT* 

(‘/.uo^Tr / 

TAKLA UAKAN 'T^ 

DESERT 


ip ..m- n 

llJ’Iln* 

• , l |n41 

- t ttv y ♦ 

>!>/✓>%>«« Si ~Wm 

UN % 

fui*“ i*l t 

1 4 ‘ 

1 ifl i 

AdyAan 

r. w* ' 

Cy Zlw 

l*f w M 

yF | 

imihj'J ykf wj, .— 


I 1 T |L 

V xi *i 


Uhwt' 


New Delhi 

★ 


Ulput, 


wrti$w*s dAorjtoi 




Ml Cvwm( 

prf* n r* iki'M 
04* m) 


llK mow 
Kan?ur 


_ ^ i'i>4«9 v^r v 

Jft! Al ** ‘ / * -^tp. J 


r 


h,i 


^Whongdu ^ *’ 

. tf'j, ,<!h*OK*i»J 

f < ^ Jr" ''** ‘* 9 ^ / * 

r # c,ui>4 n >.’ 


«uf 


vlun.uUKid 


,/jsrW, ^ BAMOLADWMphak 


l ' • 


Cu 


urn 


Cakuttj 


r 


NJjtpur 


T.^SkWl^* 


Mjnd.if.iv 


unc 

DECCAN 


W / I/ • 

BUKMA 


lUnol ? 


Hyde 


riMil 


x 

t 


> 




Rangoon 


f 


)\. / (Vientiane 

.THAILAND" 


i^Hue 


Figure 1.1 - This is section of the map of Asia. The 
area in the square is where scientists believe 
cannabis started its Life. 


Today, human intervention has caused the 
Cannabis plant to grow under more controlled 
conditions and in areas where the plant would 
not have had a previous history. It is 
estimated that in most countries there must be 
at least 2-12 different cannabis strains 
growing wildly. 

Wild Cannabis plants are rare in countries 
that have tried to eliminate the plant by 






28 


burning fields and conditioning woodlands. In 
certain countries the Cannabis plant has been 
identified as a dangerous drug and has been 
killed off by human beings and law enforcement 
officials. It is treated as a weed and as a 
plant that causes social, mental and physical 
problems. None of these reasons for removing 
the plant are well founded but the cull of 
cannabis has occurred anyhow. 

The Cannabis plant was used for many things 
other than the extraction of THC (to be 
discussed later). Our ancestors, up until the 
late 1800's early 1900's, used the Cannabis 
plant to create clothing and other materials. 
The Cannabis plant or 'hemp' as it is called in 
the textile industry is a very strong material 
and will withstand large amounts of stress 
applied to it. Hemp material is widely regarded 
as one of the best possible materials for 
producing fabrics. A pair of trousers made from 
hemp, or a shirt made from hemp will withstand 
the test of time. It is a far more superior 
material than cotton. This should give you some 
clues as to why the fabrics industry wanted to 
put a stop to the cultivation of marijuana in 
the late 1800's. Hemp fabric products will last 
longer than cotton fabric products thus the 




29 


buyer buys less over longer periods of time. 
This is the first instance of the Cannabis 
plant being subjected to ridicule for 
capitalist gain. 

The Cannabis plant has been subjected to a 
number of stereotypical formats. The first one 
is that the resin produced by the plant is 
physically addictive. This is not true and I 
will explain why. In psychiatry there is a list 
of classifications for addictions of all 
abusive substances. It is contained in a paper 
called - ICD-10 (classifications of Mental and 
Behavioural Disorders) with you can read here, 
http://www.who.int/whosis/icdlO/ 

Medical doctors are not informed clearly 
about the use and abuse of cannabis. This is 
because cannabis research is illegal in most 
countries or if research is allowed most of the 
results are suppressed. 

The only way a medical doctor can help a 
person with a cannabis problem is by having 
some experience with people who have had 
cannabis problems in the past. There are no 
special books to turn too. There are no 
references which explain clearly what to do or 
IF cannabis is physically addictive. There are 
no pills for cannabis addiction (there are for 




30 


alcoholism). The only place a doctor can go is 
to the archives of what other countries have 
said about the drug and it's abuse. As a 
doctor, one would maybe try Holland and read up 
on some of the material there, or Belgium or 
Switzerland. There can be found medical 
research papers that relate to cannabis 
dependence and all of them say the same thing. 
(A) Can it be abused? YES. (B) Can it be 
addictive? YES. (C) Is cannabis abuse or use 
life threatening? NO, but mental side effects 
such a depression can be, but only a small 
percentage of addicts (NOT USERS, BUT ADDICTS) 
go through this. (D) Has anyone ever died of 
cannabis use? ONLY 1 PERSON in the history of 
cannabis has died from its use, but read on. 
Bruce Lee, the martial arts expert died after 
taking cannabis, but the death certificate was 
later changed too 'death by misadventure' 
because of another medical herb that he took 
which he did not know he was allergic too. So 
the correct answer is 0 people have died from 
using cannabis. (E) How do you treat cannabis 
addiction? Psychotherapy is the only answer. 

In fact there are absolutely no reasons for 
the prohibition of cannabis, other than: 




31 


1) It is hard to tell if someone is under the 
influence of cannabis. Driving/working with 
machinery may be problems here. 

2) People might smoke too much and become a 
little lazy. 

3) Many governments have prohibited it for over 
70 years and it would seem very stupid if they 
told everyone that they where wrong about it. 

Now let us look at these points for a moment. 

1) Yes it is hard to tell and make no mistake - 
if you drive smoking cannabis then you are just 
as stupid as if you where driving under the 
influence of alcohol. It is never advised to 
use cannabis and then perform a procedure, like 
driving, which requires your total attention. 

As of yet there is no on the spot breathalyser 
test for cannabis use, but there are tests to 
determine if someone has used cannabis 
recently, in the last few hours, in the last 
few days, weeks or months. However, alcohol is 
not banned in a lot of countries but cannabis 


is . 




32 


2) It happens. Some people do smoke too much 
pot and they become docile to the point where 
they just want to watch television and eat. 
However, if there is no money about, and the 
person needs to survive or live somehow, you 
will soon find that person can restore their 
life back to the way it was before they started 
their cannabis binge by simply - Not smoking 
for a few days. A few days of not smoking is 
all it takes to rid cannabis of any effects it 
has had on the human body. There may be 
residual cannabinoids left in the system but 
this does not pose any problems and will soon 
wear away. 

This is not that easy with alcohol or 
heroin user. They will have to go through a 
long period of detoxification before they can 
resume a normal life. A cannabis user does not 
have to go through the detoxification period 
because there simply is none. Not only does the 
alcohol user have to spend a few days getting 
it out of his/her system but they will also 
have to deal with the withdrawal symptoms. This 
can last for months. With cannabis, it is 
simply, stop smoking cannabis and resume 
operations as normal. (Note: Pharmaceutical 
firms would love to sell a pill to cure 




33 


cannabis addiction, but as of yet can not. They 
can not prove that their pill does anything 
because there are no cannabis withdrawal 
systems to observe. Thus the pill would be 
deemed a fraudulent product if put on the 
market.) Also many homeless people's living 
standards in most cases are attributed to 
alcohol dependence/addiction and rarely, IF 
ever, is their low living standard attributed 
to cannabis dependence. Cannabis dependence is 
psychological. Treatment of cannabis addiction 
is done by psychiatrists and psychologists and 
GP's. Heroin and alcohol is treated by 
psychiatrists, psychologists, GP's and doctors 
of internal medicine for the somatic systems of 
addiction. 

3) This is a major problem because the 
government may have to set people free from 
prison and radically change their justice 
departments stance on cannabis which means that 
jobs will be lost and revenues will be lost if 
cannabis was decriminalized. Cannabis 
prohibition is a booming industry that creates 
jobs and capital. However if cannabis was 
decriminalised then these lost profits could be 
derived from a new cannabis industry. 




34 


Probably one of the best sites for medical 
information is www.lycaeum.org or 
www.overgrow.com 

One other thing to mention is that street 
cannabis may contain other added drugs. In most 
clinical cases, a person who complains about 
cannabis addiction and shows physical signs of 
addiction is not actually addicted to cannabis. 
They are addicted to the other drug substances 
that the supplier has added to his produce to 
make it stronger. 100% home grown clean 
cannabis does not contain physical additive 
properties. People who add other drugs to 
cannabis are not doing the cannabis community a 
favour. This is a good reason to grow your own 
pot. 

There are many strains or versions of the 
Cannabis plant alive today. Most strains are 
the result of human intervention and these are 
the types you will most likely come across or 
even smoke. Breeders try to produce strains 
that are tasty, smell good and give the user 
different types of highs. These are the strains 
that are best looked out for because you can be 
guaranteed that the plant has got a 'grow 




35 


history' behind it and that the seller of the 
seeds will know a good bit about the plant and 
how it 'works'. 

This ends our brief look at the history of 
Cannabis. There is much more to it than just 
this and many other books that discuss the 
legal aspects of Marijuana go into great detail 
about the history of Marijuana. In fact the 
history of Marijuana is so interesting and deep 
that a dozen chapters here would not cover the 
vastness of this plant's background. 


HOW CANNABIS IS USED 

Whenever we hear the word Cannabis we think 
of the famous leaf shape like the one on this 
book's cover. Many magazines show joints being 
rolled thick with leaves. Leaves are in fact 
the lesser potent part of the plant next to the 
stem and the roots. The cannabis plant can be 
divided into 6 main sections (Fig 1.2.). Bud, 
Stem, Branches, Nodes, Leaves, and Main Cola. 




36 



Fig 1.2 - This is a picture by BigIslandBud. Each of 
the parts of the plant has been indicated. The 3 
horizontal lines on the right show 3 Node levels of 
branching and where they occur. 
















37 


The next thing to know is that plants have 
a gender. The genders are male and female and 
sometimes a mix gender called the hermaphrodite 
condition. Now listen to this closely. 

1) The male plant is not used for smoking 
because it contains low levels of THC and does 
not taste very good, but it can get you high. 

2) The female plant when pollinated does 
produce THC but produces also seeds which 
prevent larger quantities of bud from being 
produced. 

3) A non-pollinated female (sinsemilla) plant 
will produce more flowering buds with no seeds 
and will produce higher quantities of THC than 
the male plant or a seeded female plant. The 
buds produce resin, which contain THC, and can 
drip down onto the leaves. When she is fully 
mature she should produce a very pleasing high 
depending on the grow method, the strain of 
plant and when it is harvested. 


To put it plainly, males can be smoked but 




38 


are not very good and are considered vastly 
inferior to the female plant. The female plant 
when pollinated produces seeds and can be 
smoked but is vastly inferior to a non- 
pollinated female plant (sinsemilla) that 
produces more bud. It should be the goal of 
every Cannabis user to grow non-pollinated 
female plants with big buds. The goal of a 
cannabis breeder is too produce quality seeds 
and plants. How both these things are done is 
what this book will help you to understand. 

At the end of the Cannabis plant's life 
cycle the plant is harvested. This means one of 
two things. The plant can be completely 
uprooted and treated (called a complete 
harvest) or the plant can be harvested a small 
bit and used again for a second flowering term 
(this is called re-veging (Figure 1.3.) and re¬ 
flowering) . 




39 



Figure 1.3 -A plant that is being re-veged. Picture 

by Vic High . 

When Cannabis is harvested the harvester 
concentrates on the best part of the plant, 
namely the top cola and the buds. The leaves 
are the last thing to worry about and the stem 
and roots are normally thrown away. There are 
many ways to harvest a plant and we will 






40 


explain it in detail, later. Once the grower 
has selected the parts they want, they then set 
about curing their harvest (Figure 1.4). Curing 
your harvest is important. It helps one to 
produce a finer product. After the curing has 
been done the grower can then choose how he/she 
wants to finally produce their smokable mix 
(figure 1.5). They can use the cured plant as 
it is and smoke it dry or they can produce hash 
or oils from the curing process. 



Figure 1.4 - This is a picture of some cured buds. 




41 



Figure 1.5 - This is the result of a good indoor 

harvest. 

Both Pictures by Kryptonite. 









42 



Figure 1.6 - This is a picture of an indoor garden 

from Kryptonite. 


SPECIES 


The next thing one should know about are 
the different types of Cannabis species. There 
are 3 main species of Cannabis plants. These 
are Sativa, Indica and Ruderalis. Each species 







43 


has its own group of strains which are many. 
Each species has different characteristics and 
each strain of each species has it's own 
special identity. 



Figure 1.7 - Picture of Sativa leaf by Slowhand. 

SATIVA: 

Height - Can grow tall. Averages anywhere 
between, 4-15 feet. 

Nodes - Has long internodes between branches, 3 

inches to 6. 

- Pointy leaves with no markings or 
patterns. 


Leaf 





44 



Figure 1.8 - Indica Leaf picture by Kryptonite. 


INDICA: 

Height - Small plants. Averages anywhere 
between 6 inches - 4 feet. 

Nodes - Short internodes between branches. 3 

inches and less. 

- Rounded leaves with marble like 
patterns. 


Leaf 




45 



Figure 1.9 - This is a picture of some Ruderalis from 

Sensi Seeds. 


RUDERERALIS: 

Height - Small plants. Averages anywhere 
between 6 inches and 4 feet. 

Nodes - very short internodes with much 

branching. 

- Small and thick. 


Leaf 






46 


THC 

Cannabis plants produce psychoactive 
ingredients called cannabinoids. The main 
ingredient of the cannabinoids that gives the 
high effect is called - delta 9 THC. All 
strains vary in THC levels that come in 
different percentages. Some plants may contain 
100% THC but the "levels" of THC may be low. 
Other plants have only 60% THC, but the 
"levels" of THC may be very high. A good 
potent plant will have both levels and 
quantities very high. Plants produce something 
called - delta 8 THC. This ingredient is in low 
levels but does contribute to the high. When we 
mention THC levels, we are talking about both 
delta 8 and 9. 

There are also other ingredients that add 
to the high such as CBD, CBN, THCV, CBDV, CDC 
and CBL, but are only very minor compared to 
THC . 

The difference between THC levels and THC 
quantities is that THC levels are genetic. They 
are not under the influence of the grower. THC 
quantities on the other hand are. This is to do 
with bud mass and how much resin can be 
generated in that bud mass. Some bud may only 




47 


contain 20% THC, with a THC level of 5. The 
same plant grown under better conditions and 
light will produce 70% THC, with a THC level of 
5. The '5' is genetic. The quantities of 20% 
and 70% are under the grower's control. 

When examining a strain in a seed-bank 
catalogue one is guided to check for the THC 
levels of that plant to understand how potent 
the plant is. Many seed sellers and breeders 
measure their plants THC levels and give 
accounts on how much THC their plants have. Of 
course many breeders like to exaggerate on how 
much THC their plants produce, but some do not. 
If you wish to know more about THC levels it is 
best to consult your seed-bank or breeder for 
details . 

No complete study of cannabinoids has been 
made public since this book's publication. This 
is because cross breeding produces so many 
different results that it is hard to keep track 
on what is happening. Some 'old timer' strains 
are still around and have been tested. This 
information can be obtained from the larger 
seed production companies in Holland. THC 
testing is also an expensive process that 
requires heavy amounts of research. The other 




48 


interesting factor is that some plants do not 
produce any THC at all. These plants have been 
genetically engineered (GM) to produce very low 
levels of THC and are mainly used by farmers in 
some countries who have permission to grow 
cannabis for hemp production ONLY. It is best 
to keep away from these seeds and strains. They 
will not get you high. There is project called 
the PMP (potency monitoring project) that is 
carried out by some government-funded agencies, 
but the results are questionable. 

ZERO ZERO 


The other thing that may interest you is 
that Cannabis can be cured in various forms and 
one of these popular forms is HASHISH (Figure 
1 . 10 ) . 




49 



Figure 1.10 - This is some raw hash extraction by 
Kryptonite. This hash should be pure without any 

additives. 



50 


Hashish can also be graded and one of the 
most famous grades of Hashish is called Zero 
Zero. Hashish making (Figure 1.11) can improve 
(but sometimes degrade) the overall potency of 
marijuana. The grades of Hashish are as 
follows. 00 (zero zero), 0, 1, 2, 3. Zero Zero 
is by far the most purest form of Hashish on 
the market today and comes from plants that 
have high levels of THC in conjunction with a 
good Hash making technique. Sometimes the 
technique may be good but the levels of THC in 
the plant are low. This may produce a grade 
such as a 2 or a 3. 

It is wise to note that the Potency of a 
plant depends on a number of factors. It should 
be the goal of every grower to produce a 
potent, high grade, product. Zero Zero is also 
a ’western' concept derived from hash types 
that come from Morocco. 




51 



Figure 1.11 - This picture shows some hash being 
made. The powder-like substance is the collection of 
trichomes from the plant. This powder will eventually 
be solidified to make a bar of hash. Photograph by 

Chimera. 


RESIN 

Female plants produce resin glands (Figure 
1.12 and 1.14). Some of these glands may have 
lots of resin but are not very potent. Other 
plants may have little resin but are very 






52 


potent. Optimal growth, is a plant that has 
lots of resin and is very potent. Resin glands 
are produced all over the female flower and new 
leaves. They can be seen clearly with the use 
of a magnifying aid. These resin glands are 
correctly called Trichomes. 



Figure 1.12 - This picture is a macro shot of some 
trichomes as they look on the plant. Notice the tip 
shape ball. This contains cannabinoids. Photograph by 

Joop Jumas. 





53 



Figure 1.13 - This flowering female is covered in 
Trichomes. That is what gives this bud her frosty 
look. Picture by Chimera. 








54 


Resin can be rubbed off the bud using the 
fingers and then rolled into the palms to 
create small balls of hand rubbed hashish. It 
is within these glands that one is to find the 
main concentration of produced cannabinoids and 
THC. When a plant is in full flowering the 
resin gland can explode or break dropping resin 
down onto the leaves below. This can also give 
the leaves their shiny frosty potent look 
during flowering. Towards the bottom of the 
plant are located the fan leaves. These leaves 
are generally large and collect most of the 
light for plant growth. Because these leaves 
are far away from the top of the plant, which 
produce the most amount of resin glands and 
buds, they collect the least amount of resin 
and are not very potent. It is best to consider 
separating these fan leaves from the rest of 
the plant during harvest because these leaves 
will not give you the best quality high. 




55 



Figure 1.14 - Trichomes Photograph by Joop Jumas. 


THE HIGH 


We should now have an idea as to what we 
are looking for in terms of a good quality 
smoke. We are looking for non-pollinated female 
plants that are flowering and producing lots of 
buds with resin glands that contain high levels 
and amounts of THC. We are also looking for 
plants that have been well cured and processed 
in a way that allows us to sample the full 






56 


flavour, smell and taste of the plant. One must 
also be aware that some plants are very potent 
and can literally knock one's socks off. This 
is where taste comes into play. Some people 
like plants that give a head high but do not 
cause one to fall asleep. Other people like 
plants that give a down effect and cause the 
body to become less responsive to stimuli. The 
body down is called 'The couch-lock effect' . 

The head high is simply called 'The head high.' 

Now another thing must be considered here. 
Remember that we talked about Species of 
Cannabis - Sativa, Indica and rudereralis? Well 
rudereralis is hardly used much today. Sativa 
and Indica are extremely common and these 2 
species will be the main focus of this book. 
Also both species have two different forms of 
high. The high of each species can be 
controlled depending on the time at which you 
harvest. Not only this but the species can be 
crossed to produce Indica/Sativa type plants or 
Sativa/Indica type plants. This may sound all 
very confusing at first, but it is in fact all 
quite simple. We will explain more about this 
in our next chapter. 




57 


Chapter 2 


jkghi M MMHIMk mm 

9||fV 



Figure 2.1 - Some cannabis seeds by Kryptonite. 

At the moment there are approximately 450 
seed varieties of Cannabis on the market today. 
Out of the 450 seed varieties, 200 are worth 
looking at and out of the 200 varieties about 
50 or so are outstanding. Each strain is either 
a pure species type (taking 2 plants of the 
same species and crossing them) or a crossbreed 
of two or more species (taking 2 plants from 
different species and crossing them). 

Out of the 450 seed varieties we said that 




58 


200 where good. This leaves 250 left. Those 250 
are usually very unstable crossbreed strains. 
These complete hybrids plants are mixed so much 
that they can not be classified at either 
Sativa or Indica. They are classified in a 
different way that we will explain this in the 
strain format table below. 

Most hybrids do not last long on the market 
and are primarily found only among breeders who 
are experimenting with their plant's genetics. 
Seed producers tend to only produce the 
following strain categories. Some Hybrids can 
be excellent though! 


PURE SATIVA (This is a pure species) 
SATIVA (This is a mostly Sativa species 
with some Indica) 

PURE INDICA (This is a pure species) 
INDICA (This is a mostly Indica species 
with some Sativa) 

INDICA/SATIVA (This is a 50/50 cross 
between a Sativa and an Indica species) 




59 


They also produce: 

RUDERALIS (This is a pure species) 

And some other Ruderalis mixes. However 
ruderalis is a problematic plant. It does not 
produce large quantities of THC, nor does it 
flower like the other varieties. Ruderalis is 
considered sub-standard by most growers because 
it flowers according to age and does not flower 
according to the photoperiod. We will explain 
what the photoperiod is in a moment. 

Now remember that we said an Indica/Sativa 
cross would produce two different highs. Well 
we lied a little. If they are both 50%/50% 
crosses then the high will be a 50%/50% mix. 
Indica/Sativa and Sativa/Indica is really the 
same thing. 

Pure Sativa is a total 'Head High'. Pure 
Indica is a total 'Body Stone/couch-lock' . A 
50/50 cross will give a 50% 'Head high' and a 
50% 'Body Stone'. If an Indica plant is crossed 
slightly with a Sativa plant it will give a 60% 
'Body Stone' and a 40%'Head High'. A Sativa 
plant that is crossed slightly with an Indica 
plant will give a 60% 'Head High' and a 40% 
'Body Stone'. The 60/40 ratio is most common 




60 


but some breeders can change that ratio. When 
choosing a seed, check to see if it is pure or 
if it has a ratio. Most seed sellers will have 
this listed along with their seed type. So when 
we look at some strains that are crossbreeds we 
must understand which species the plants are 
leaning towards. Along with the cross you can 
expect that the plant will look different. Some 
Sativa plants may be shorter because of the 
Indica breeding in them and some Indica plants 
may be taller because of the Sativa breeding in 
them. This is okay though because later on we 
will find that as a grower we have control over 
how a plant will look and grow. As a grower we 
can influence height and plant features. We can 
also harvest the plant in such a way that we 
can produce a different high type. The later 
you harvest the plant the more you will help 
induce a couch-lock effect. Harvesting just 
before peak will induce a cerebral high. If you 
are working with strains that are for either 
cerebral or couch-lock highs then you can 
harvest early or later and help induce some of 
these 'high type' properties. 




61 



Figure 2.2 - This is a wonderful harvest picture by 

GIYO. 

Hopefully with the knowledge you have been 
given so far you are equipped to choose a plant 
that suits your needs in terms of height. 











62 


potency and high type. There is no point trying 
to grow an 8-foot Sativa Bush indoors if you do 
not have the space for it. 2 foot Indica plants 
outdoors may not survive if other plants 
compete with it for light. As a rule we can 
always shorten the plants lengths through 
pruning, but rarely can we double the plants 
height if the strain’s genes only allow the 
strain to grow 2 or 3 feet. 



Figure 2.3 -A small grow room by Mr.Zog. 



63 


HOW TO GET SEEDS 


The best way to get seeds is from a friend 
who has grown a type of plant that you enjoyed 
to smoke. This, by far, is the best way 
because, (1) You get the seeds for free and (2) 
you know what the high type will be because you 
have already tasted it. 

The next best way is the Internet. The 
Internet is full of seed-banks that wish to 
sell you seeds, but there are a few problems 
that you may encounter. The first problem is 
that some of these seed-banks will rip you off. 
The second is that some of these seed-banks do 
not ship worldwide. The third is that some of 
these seed-banks misrepresent their stock. The 
fourth is that seeds can be very expensive. 

Some seed-banks sell seeds anywhere between (US 
Dollars = $, UK Stirling = £) $80/£70 and 

$300/£290 for 10 - 16 seeds. There are rip-off 
artists out there, but then again some of these 
seeds are worth the money because the strain is 
excellent in vigour and production. So how do 
we choose our seed-bank and how do we really 
know what seeds to pick? 




64 


CHOOSING A SEED-BANK 

As a rule if you find a classy seed-bank 
then you will find classy breeders using that 
seed-bank to sell their seeds. 

If you find a seed-bank then the first 
thing you should do is to examine what people 
have to say about that seed-bank. The best way 
to find this out is to check one of the more 
popular websites on the net like 
www.yahooka.com. Some web sites give listings 
and ratings on seed-banks. 

You can also do a search on the net using a 
search engine like AltaVista or Yahoo. Find a 
good web site that is run by a number of people 
and not a web site that is run by one person. A 
community of users is a good place to go for 
message board forums and chat. Also check to 
see that the site has a registered URL, like a 
.com site. If they use a free web site service 
then consider staying clear of it because it 
can disappear without trace overnight. Once you 
have found a web site then run a search on 
'seeds'. A listing may appear of all known 
seed-banks that deal over the Internet. It is 
best then to check out the reviews on each 




65 


seed-bank by the public. A good one is 
www.yahooka.com. This gives the latest update 
on each seed-bank and gives them a review out 
of 5. Find the URL of each seed-bank and check 
out the prices. Some seed-banks do deals on 
seeds and you will find that prices do change 
from bank to bank. The next thing you do before 
buying anything is to send the web master an e- 
mail. Ask him about his services, what seeds 
you like, how he delivers, security 
arrangement, and if he can deliver to your 
country. In some countries seeds are legal. In 
others they are not. Wait until he gives you a 
reply. If you do not get a reply then do not 
use that seed-bank. These people are salesmen 
and should communicate with you and answer all 
your questions. Also ask how the money should 
be sent and ask about postage and packaging. 
Most seed-banks sell their seeds in batches of 
10 - 20. This means that you will get 10 - 20 
seeds in the post. Anything can happen. A 
misplaced foot in the postal office can kill 
the seeds, making them not viable. Good seed- 
banks provide good packaging. Ask about it. 

If your seeds do not arrive send an e-mail 
to the seed-bank and ask them what happened. If 
they do not reply or if your seeds are lost 




66 


write them a complaint and then post that 
complaint in one of the web boards like 
yahooka.com. The more people complain the 
better the chances of indicating seed-banks 
that are ripping people off. Also if you get 
your seeds in good condition then it is always 
wise to post a good review of that seed-bank. 
This will also improve your communication with 
that seed-bank the next time you buy seeds (you 
may get discounts). If you do not have access 
to the web then you will have to get addresses 
for these seed-banks and send them a letter 
asking for further information. Some seed-banks 
have even advertised in the back of this book. 


WHAT TO LOOK FOR IN CHOOSING SEEDS 


Okay, so now you have an idea of what type 
of plant you want and the seed-bank that you 
are going to use. The next step is too check if 
the seeds are for indoor or outdoor use. There 
is a saying that all cannabis seeds can be 
grown indoors and outdoor. This is true, but 
that is not what the breeder had intended. If 
the breeder had created a plant that does well 
indoors then it is suggested that you only grow 




67 


these seeds indoors. If you grow outdoors and 
the plant does not produce that well, then you 
know that you should have followed the seed- 
banks advice. Next time take that advice. There 
is nothing stopping you from experimenting, and 
some growers have produced excellent results by 
putting outdoor seeds indoors or putting indoor 
seeds outdoors, but it is best if you follow 
the advice you are given, especially if you are 
new to growing. 



Figure 2.4 - Outdoor sativa. 




68 



Figure 2.5 - Indoor Sativa. 


Both of these pictures, figure 2.4 and 2.5, 
show a mostly sativa strain growing outdoors 
and indoors. As you can see this would probably 
be labelled an outdoor strain because of its 
size. The grower, mullummadman, has been able 
to grow it both ways though. 

You may also find that a number of similar 
strains have been produced by different 
breeders. When you look at the seed-bank list 
you may see 1-4 types of the same plant. What 
is going on here you ask? Well, let us take 




69 


Skunk#l for example. Skunk#l is a mostly sativa 
plant but there are about 7 breeders who have 
provided a certain seed-bank with these seeds. 
Each seed breeder tries to develop the best 
plant possible for that strain type. You will 
find that some breeders are good and others are 
not so good. Make sure that you check with the 
seed-bank to see which breeder's strains are 
the best. Always choose the best. The reason 
for choosing the best is that later you can 
PRODUCE YOUR OWN SEED from that strain! Welcome 
to the wonderful world of Marijuana growing. 

Try www.paradise-seeds.com and 
www.seriousseeds.com for seeds. 

The next thing to look for is flowering 
times. Each strain is a bit different on 
flowering times. In a nutshell flowering is the 
next cycle after your plant shows its sex. 

There are 3 main stages in plant growth. 
Germination, Vegetative growth and Flowering. 

It is towards the last days of flowering that 
you should begin your harvest. If the seed-bank 
says, Skunk#l Flowering time: 7-9 weeks then 
you should be able to know roughly when your 
plant will be ready for harvest (in this case 




70 


it will 7-9 weeks from the time your plant 
starts to flower). 

Some plants have shorter flowering times 
and others have longer. This is a guide to help 
you understand how long it will take, after 
vegetative growth is complete, before you will 
have a chance to saviour your plant's delights. 

The last piece of advice is this. Always 
consult someone about your strain type. Who 
knows, they may be able to recommend something 
better.... Or maybe even have a private seed 
stash of their own. 



Figure 2.6 - This is some Skunk#l by Strawdog. 





71 



Figure 2.1 - Seeds enough to grow between 100 and 200 
plants. Picture by Kryptonite. 






72 



Figure 2.8 - This is another great picture of some 
female bud by Kryptonite. 





73 


GROWING FACTORS 

This is important to bear in mind before 
you grow your weed. Have you got the time to 
take care of your plants? Are you going to be 
taking long holidays? Have you got someone you 
trust to take care of your plants? And if you 
do how secure is your grow area? How do the 
people you live with feel about this? Can you 
hide the smell when the plants start to flower? 
Are you prepared to pay money on lights and 
other grow items? Are you prepared to pay the 
costs of a higher electricity bill? Are people 
going to see your grow room? Are people going 
to walk past your grow site outdoors? Is the 
meter man going to see your grow room? Is the 
gas man going to see your grow room? Are you 
sure that you really want to do this? 




74 



Figure 2.9 - This is an example of how some outdoor 
plants can get really big and tall. Sometimes they 
can be hard to hide. Picture by Mullummadman. 


If you are negative on any of these points 
above then I suggest that you resolve those 
issues before you move on. 

The next thing I am going to tell you is 
the most important thing you will ever hear 
when growing marijuana. People have lived their 
whole lives growing cannabis and have never had 
an encounter with the law. It is so simple, but 
very hard to do. If you can do it then you are 
halfway to being an expert grower. Are you 



75 


ready for it? 




76 


NEVER TELL ANYONE THAT YOU 
ARE GROWING CANNABIS!!! 




77 


If you do this then you will never have a 
problem other than someone accidentally walking 
into your grow area. NEVER EVER TELL ANYONE 
ANYTHING, EVER. If you can do this then you 
will have more security than a castle equipped 
with guard-dogs henchmen and the works. Loose 
lips cause 99.9% of all security related issues 
being breached. 00.1% is caused because you did 
not take the time out to conceal your area well 
enough. Loose lips sink ships. 

If you plan to share your crop with your 
friends then do it by another means, like - 
'Hey guys look what I just bought'. The only 
people who should know that you grow are the 
people who live with you. If your husband/wife 
has loose lips, then maybe you should consider 
guerrilla growing outdoors (explained later.) 
Other than that, these are the most important 
factors you need to consider. Never grow at 
home if other people are not going to know 
about it. This is bad and always causes 
problems in the end. So what does that say? 
Growing on your own is the best way. Growing 
with other people is a problem unless you know 
they are okay with it. You will have to figure 
some of these things out for yourself. 




78 


The next factor is bugs and pests. Always, 
always have a bottle of pesticide that kills 
SPIDER MITES. Spider Mites can reduce your 
plants to garbage within a couple of days. 

NEVER EVER BRING A PLANT INSIDE THAT HAS BEEN 
OUTSIDE. People who have done this have managed 
to kill nearly every plant in their house 
because they brought a plant indoors that had 
spider mites. Marijuana plants are very 
vulnerable to mite attacks because the spider 
mites love to suck marijuana plants dry. They 
are tiny, about half the size of this dot 

->> . I can not stress how important this 

is. We will talk more about pests later. 

The next thing we will talk about is what 
we expect our seeds to do before they become 
full flowering plants. 




79 



Figure 2.10 - This is example of what pest damage can 
do to your crop. Notice how the leaf has been eaten. 

Picture by Slowhand. 







80 


THE LIFE CYCLE OF THE MARIJUANA PLANT 



Figure 2.11 - Another wonderful bud shot 


from Chimera. 

We said before that a plant would grow in 
three main stages. Germination, Vegetative 
growth and flowering. Plants actually grow in 6 
stages. Here is the life cycle of the cannabis 











81 


plant. 

Germination: 


This is the initial stage of growth and 
occurs when your seed's embryo cracks open and 
the seedling produces a root. This root fixes 
itself into the soil and pushes the newborn 
seeding up and over the soil surface. Following 
surface contact two embryonic leaves open 
outwards to receive sunlight, pushing the empty 
seed shell away from the seedling. It takes 
anywhere between 12 hours to 3 weeks for seeds 
to germinate. Once the plant has reached this 
stage it goes into the seedling stage. 



Figure 2.12 - This is a great picture of an 
Indica seedling by Strawdog. 





82 


Seedling Stage: 


After the first pair of embryonic leaves 
are receiving light (Figure 2.12), the plant 
will begin to produce another small set of new 
leaves. These leaves are different from the 
last and may have some Marijuana 
characteristics such as the three rounded 
finger shaped points. As the seedling grows 
more of these leaves are formed and bush 
upwards along with a stem. Some stems are very 
weak at this stage and need the support of a 
small thin wooden stake tied to the seedling 
with some fine thread. The seedling stage can 
last between 1 and 3 weeks. At the end of the 
seedling stage your plant will have maybe 4-8 
new leaves. Some of the old bottom leaves may 
drop off. 




83 



Figure 2.13 - Here is a picture of a cannabis plant 
in vegetative growth. This picture is from GIYO. 


Vegetative Growth: 


The plant now begins to grow at the rate 
which its leaves can produce energy. At this 
stage the plant needs all the light and food it 













84 


can get. It will continue to grow upwards 
producing new leaves as it moves along (Figure 
2.13). It will also produce a thicker stem with 
thicker branches and with more fingers on the 
leaves. It will eventually start to show its 
sex. When it does this it is time for the 
plant's pre-flowering stage. It can take 
anywhere between 1 and 5 months for the plant 
to hit this next stage. 

Pre-flowering: 


At this stage the plant slows down in 
developing its height and starts to produce 
more branches and nodes. The plant fills out in 
the pre-flowering stage. During this phase of 
the plant cycle your plant will start to show a 
calyx which appears where the branches meet the 
stem (nodes). Pre-flowering can take anywhere 
between 1 day to 2 weeks. (See last page of 
this book for pre-flowering/calyx illustration) 




85 



Figure 2.14 - This is a great picture of a flowering 
plant. It should be indicated here that this plant is 

a female. Picture by GIYO. 











86 


Flowering: 

During this stage the plant continues to fill 
out. The plant will show its sex clearly. The 
male plant produces little balls that are 
clustered together like grapes. The female 
plant produces little white/cream pistils that 
look like hairs in a pod. Each of the plants 
will continue to fill out more and their 
flowers will continue to grow. It can take 
anywhere between 4 to 16 weeks for the plant to 
fully develop its flowers (Figure 2.14) . During 
this time the male's pollen sacks would have 
burst spreading pollen to the female flowers. 




87 



Figure 2.15 - Seeded bud picture 
by Shecky Greene. 



88 


Seed: 

The female plant will produce seeds at this 
point if she has received viable pollen from a 
male plant. The seeds grow within the female 
bud and can take anywhere between 2 weeks to 16 
weeks, to grow to full maturity. The female 
pistils may change colour before finally 
bursting the seedpods, sending them to the soil 
below. (Breeders like to collect their seed 
before the seedpods burst.) 

These are the six stages of the life cycle of a 
cannabis plant. It is important to know that if 
the males are separated from the females and 
killed off then the females will not become 
pollinated. Let us go back a step and describe 
what happens here. 




89 


FLOWERING NON-POLLINATED FEMALES 
(SINSEMILLA CROP) 



Figure 2.16 - This is some bud by Gyro. The picture 
is upside down because it is freshly harvested bud 

strung up. 









90 


During this stage the plant continues to 
fill out. The plant will show its sex more 
clearly. The female plant produces little 
creamy/white pistils. The plant will continue 
to fill out more and its flowers will continue 
to grow. It can take anywhere between 4 and 16 
weeks for the plants to fully develop. During 
this time though there are no males to 
pollinate the female plants. The buds will grow 
larger and develop more resin glands. Resin may 
drop down onto the leaves and the plant becomes 
very sticky. The hairs on the buds begin to get 
thicker and cluster into balls. The reason for 
the high increase in bud growth is that the 
female plant is trying her best to attract male 
pollen. Towards the last days of flowering the 
pistils will change colour showing that the 
plant is ready for harvest. 

CYCLE TIMES 


Given the above data it can take anywhere 
between 10 weeks and 36 weeks for a plant to 
grow to maturity. That is, again, anywhere 
between 2.5 months to 9 months. The most common 
grow time is 3 to 4 months. All this is 




91 


dependent on the strain that you choose. Pure 
Sativa can run anywhere into the 6-9 month 
bracket. Indica can flower in 6 weeks. As you 
can image a Sativa/Indica plant will fall into 
the 2-4 month flowering period. 



Figure 2.17 - Seeded bud picture by Shecky 

Greene. 




92 



Figure 2.18 - Great bushy plant picture by X3nO. 











93 


Chapter 3 

PROPAGATION 

What is propagation? 

Propagation: 1 The action of breeding or multiplying 
by natural processes; procreation, generation, 
reproduction. 2 The action of spreading an idea, 
practice , etc., from place to place. 3 Increase in 
amount or extent; enlargement; extension in space or 
time. 

Propagation is 'The Grow'. However most 
people treat propagation as the actual events 
occurring between the planting of the seed and 
the transplant of that seedling to the main 
grow environment. Here we will treat 
propagation as the entire process of growing 
from seed to harvest. Propagation also includes 
the logistics of the grow. 

So what are you going to do? Are you going 
to buy a batch of 10 seeds and grow them all in 
one go? Are you going to then kill the males 
and just smoke the females? Are you going to 
keep the males and produce more seeds from the 
females? How many seeds can a female plant 




94 


produce? Should I plant my 10 seeds in one go? 
What should I do to guarantee that all my seeds 
will grow? These are the questions that you 
should be asking before you begin to grow and 
this is where propagation logistics comes into 
play. The answers depend largely on the size of 
your grow area and what your budget is. 

Let's say we have about $200/£180 to spend 
on seeds. We can buy an expensive strain like a 
G13 cross and then we can grow the G13 and 
produce more seeds from it. We can get anything 
between 100 and 2000 seeds depending on plant 
size and grow conditions. If we grow this 
season for 4 months and at the end produce a 
lot of seeds then we may never need to buy 
seeds for this strain again. 

There is something else we can do called - 
CLONING. 




95 



Figure 3.1 - Here are some clones by Slowhand. 

This is a technique where by we can grow a 
number of plants and select a good female. Then 
we can take cuttings from that female mother 
plant and grow these cuttings into new plants. 
Clones always keep the same sex and vigour of 
the mother plant. It is also possible to create 
a garden of plants that will last for decades 
through cloning from a single female mother 
plant. Cloning is discussed in detail in a 








96 


later chapter 

For the new grower it is advised that you 
buy 10 seeds and only germinate 3 the first 
time followed by another 3 the following week 
followed by the last 4 in two weeks after that. 
This will allow you some degree of 
experimentation as you may fail on your first 
attempt to germinate the seeds because of lack 
of any previous cannabis growing experience. 

For people who have germinated seeds once 
before in the past, it is advised that you 
germinate 5 followed by another 5 the next 
week. If you are a long time grower with a good 
amount of growing experience then you can 
germinate all 10 in one go. Again you do not 
have to do it this way. It just helps reduce 
the risk of failing all the seeds because of 
bad germination methods. 

During your plants growth you may decide 
that you want to pollinate ONLY ONE of your 
females. This means that you need to have two 
grow areas. One for growing all your female 
plants and another for growing a single or more 
females mixed in with some males. As we said 
before this depends on how much grow space you 
have and how much money you want to spend. It 
is important that your pollination room is kept 




97 


well away from your female grow room. Pollen 
can travel by air and it is advised that the 
two areas are kept well apart. Also bees and 
other insects can spread pollen. Not only that 
but you can too. Always wash your hands and 
face after handling a male plant. This saves 
problems of pollen from a male plant getting 
onto a female that you wish to keep for 
sinsemilla. 



Figure 3.2 - Pollen from the male plant can be 
collected by shaking it over a clean surface such as 
a sheet of glass. The pollen can then we swept up by 
using a credit card. If you gather it in a piece of 
paper like this then you can . 




98 



Figure 3.3 - . Store male pollen in a test 

tube like this. If kept out of the light pollen can 
keep for a long time. You can use this pollen to make 
seeds from a female plant by sprinkling some of the 
pollen onto the female flowers. Photography film 
canisters also make great pollen storage units. Both 

picture by Slowhand. 





99 



Figure 3.4 - This is a great picture of an indoor 
grow room by GIYO. The light hanging down over the 
plants is a HPS light. It gives off an orange glow to 

the grow room. 




100 


So being logical we can see that we have 
paid a bit of money for 10 seeds and that we 
want to get 100% germination results. The 
following passages will tell you how to achieve 
that success rate. 

WAYS TO GERMINATE YOUR SEEDS 


Seeds can be germinated in a number of 
ways. Some ways guarantee more success than 
others. It is recommended that you consider the 
'rockwool SBS propagation tray' method. 



Figure 3.5 - Germination picture by BushyOlderGrower. 









101 


Seed soil propagation: 


This is a method whereby the seeds are 
placed down in moist soil about 3mm or the 
length of the seed from the surface. The soil 
is kept moist (Not soaking wet) by sprinkling 
water over it once a day. This has a moderate 
success rate. Out of 10 seeds only 7-8 may 
germinate. 

Seed towel propagation: 



Figure 3.6 - This is an example of some seeds that 
have germinated. This method is the towel germination 
method. Picture by Kryptonite. 





102 


This is a method whereby the seeds are 
placed either on a damp towel or on a damp 
piece of cotton wool. Cheesecloth may also be 
used. The seed is then covered with more damp 
wool or a damp towel. The towel/wool must be 
kept moist at all times. If the material dries 
out it may damage the seeds. Everyday check to 
see if the seeds have started to produce any 
roots. If they have then immediately transfer 
the seedling to a grow medium (such as soil) 
using a pair of tweezers. Do not touch the 
root. This has a moderate to high success rate. 
Out of 10 seeds 8-9 may germinate. The 
problem with this method is that sometimes the 
transplant can cause the seedling to go into 
shock. This can kill the germination process 
leaving you with nothing. With practice you can 
get all your seeds to germinate. 

Propagation kits: 


This is a method whereby the seeds are 
placed in small unit, called a seed or clone 
propagator, which is designed to help plants 
germinate. One such kit is called a rockwool 
SBS Propagation Tray. Some of these kits can be 




103 


heated and look like a miniature greenhouse. At 
the bottom of the tray is a small area where 
water, or even better 'some germination 
hormone' is poured. Small grow cubes called 
rockwool cubes are placed into slots in the 
tray, which automatically dips the rockwool 
into the solution (Figure 3.8). The seeds are 
placed into tiny holes in the cubes and the 
cover is then put back on the unit. 



Figure 3.7 - Propagation kit and Clones by Strawdog. 






104 


This has a very high success rate. All the 
seeds can sometimes germinate and in most cases 
often do. The disadvantage to this method is 
that you need to spend money on the tray, 
rockwool and grow fertilizers. The price of the 
tray is about $10/£10, the rockwool cubes 
$5/£5, the grow fertilizers $5/£5. If you have 
spent $50/£50 on seeds then why not spend the 
extra $20/£20 on getting a small kit together 
like this. The other advantage is that you can 
use this same tray to help root your clones. 



Figure 3.8 - Overhead shot of some seedlings 
germinating in rockwool. Picture by Shecky Greene. 



105 


DANGERS WHEN PROPAGATING SEEDS 

Drafts are a killer and will stunt 
germination. Always make sure that you keep 
your germinating seeds away from any open 
windows or fans. Also make sure that the room 
is kept warm. A cold room can inhibit your 
germination rates. The other thing to look out 
for when using germination fertilizers is to 
make sure that your mixture is correct. Do not 
use high doses of fertilizers with seedlings. 

In fact water is all seedlings should need. You 
do not need to add anything. Some people do use 
germination solutions though, but make sure 
that you keep these solution strengths down 
low. An incorrect mixture can burn your 
seedlings and cause them to fail. Another thing 
to do is to leave your seeds alone to grow. Do 
not go fiddling with them, hence the term 
'digging up your seeds'. Some people tend to 
disturb the soil to see how their seeds are 
doing. This is a bad move and can break or even 
damage the seed and root. The other thing to 
keep in mind is that some strains produce 
seedlings that have weak stems. This means that 
the seedling may tend to lean, sometime more 
than 90 degrees, to the left or right. If you 




106 


find that your seedlings need support then use 
a small stick to hold your seedling up. Tie the 
stem to the stick using a piece of thread. 

Never tie the thread above a growing shoot or 
the seedling will push up against the thread 
and tear itself. You may continue to use a 
stick to support your plant as it grows. If 
your plant still has a weak stem during 
vegetative growth it is recommended that you 
give the base of the stem a little shake. This 
will help the plant to develop a more solid 
stem. Outdoors the wind shakes a plant and 
causes it to develop this solid stem. You can 
fake the wind by doing this mildly every 
morning for two or three seconds. However if 
you read on you will find that indoor fans help 
do this. (Note: Never bring a stick from 
outdoors indoors for support as the stick may 
have some bugs on it. Some bugs such as spider 
mites can go undetected in their incubation 
nests inside the wood.) 


Seeds must also be viable if they are going 
to germinate. Never use white seeds. These are 
immature. Find seeds that have white and grey 
markings or another colour apart from white. 




107 


Crushed seeds will also not germinate. Old 
seeds may have trouble germinating. Always try 
to use the best seeds you can find. 

TRANSPLANTING 

During the stages between germination and 
vegetative growth the grower may find that 
he/she needs a bigger pot. Transplanting is 
done nearly always as early as possible. One 
example of a transplant is when the seedlings 
are ready in their Rookwool SBS tray. The 
seedling is lifted from the tray along with the 
rockwool cube and placed in another grow medium 
such as soil, or maybe even a hydroponics set¬ 
up (more about hydroponics later). That is 
called a transplant. There is not much of 
problem when transferring the cube and seedling 
to the soil. Just dig a small hole in the soil 
for the cube and place it in. Cover the cube 
with soil. The cube will not effect your plants 
growth and will add support if anything. 

If you have started your seedlings in soil 
then you may want to transplant the plant to a 
bigger pot. The problem with transplanting is 
that people like to move the soil and roots 
along with the plant from one pot to another. 




108 


This means that the plant must be lifted out 
with the soil in place. How is this done? Well 
there are two ways. The first way is that one 
does not need to remove the plant from the 
smaller pot at all. All you have to do is cut 
away the base of the small pot and place this 
pot into the bigger pot of soil. The roots will 
grow down through the bottom hole of the old 
pot and into the new one. The roots will always 
find their way down. The other way is too make 
sure that the soil is very dry. Delay watering 
your plant for a couple of days and let the 
soil settle hard. Then you can use a clean 
knife to cut around the inside of the pot. Cut 
deep, but do not damage the roots. When you 
have done this push your fingers down into the 
side and lift the plant and soil out. You will 
have some breakaway soil but this does not 
matter, as long there is not too much of it 
lost. Quickly place the plant into the larger 
pot and fill with soil. Give your plant some 
water so that it will take to the new soil. 
Never ever try to lift your plant by the stem. 
Even though the stem may look safe and strong 
this nearly always causes problems down the 
line. You should always have a firm grip of the 
soil when transplanting. Some people like to 




109 


clean the roots, but I would not recommend it 
for cannabis. If your soil is very compact you 
maybe able to turn the pot upside down and tap 
the whole medium out as one solid mass. 

During some transplants the cannabis plant 
may go into shock, even if your transplant was 
clean and perfect. If you have kept your plant 
well it should survive. If the plant has not 
been looked after it may fail quickly. A good 
grower always takes care of his/her plants. 
Transplant shock is caused by a disturbance of 
the roots. If the roots are cut or fall down, 
the plant does not respond well to this. This 
is why you must always make sure that you keep 
a firm hold of the soil during transplants. 
Also refrain from feeding them for 1 week if 
you can. There are some transplant feeding 
products that work as hormones out there and 
you may wish to have a look at those. 

GERMINATION SOIL 


There are many soils out there that 
advertise themselves as germination soils. They 
basically are the same as any other soil except 
they contain micronutrients and are kept 
somewhat 'clean' (the soil is sifted and no 




110 


compost is added). Ordinary loam soil with a pH 
of 7 and an NPK of higher or equal amounts of N 
than P or K is good for starting seeds in. Even 
the ratios of NPK @ 5:1:1 or 8:4:4 are good. 
Just make sure that the N is equal too or 
higher than the P and K factors on the label. 
More about soil later. 

INDOOR AND OUTDOOR GROWING 


We are now coming to the first core divide 
in growing marijuana. At this stage you should 
now know something about the History of 
Cannabis, How it is smoked. Cannabis Species, 
The Cannabis High, Seeds, How to choose and 
obtain seeds. Grow factors. The life cycle of 
the plant. Propagation, Germination and 
Transplanting. Now all these things are 
generally pre-production methods except for 
Transplanting. You are about to take your 
seedling and put it into your main grow area. 
This means that for the next 3-6 months your 
plant is going to be located in a certain 
environment. That environment is either indoors 
or outdoors. So let us talk about each in 
brief for a moment. 




Ill 


GENERAL INDOOR GROWING 



Figure 3.9 - Indoor Grow room picture by Shipperke. 

Light is the most important factor next to 
choosing your strain that you must consider. 
There are two main ways to light your plants 




112 


indoors. Natural light and Artificial light. 
Both ways have advantages and disadvantages. 


The first thing you should know is that 
indoor lights produce bigger flowers (more bud) 
than natural window light. This means you get 
more THC quantity with artificial lights than 
you will with natural sunlight indoors. Even in 
countries that have hot sun for 6 months of the 
year you can still find it hard to produce big 
buds indoors under natural light. Some people 
have grown plants under an attic window that 
they open during the dry days. This will grow 
you bud but not as much as you would get using 
an artificial light system. The other side of 
the coin is that natural light is free, 
electricity is not and grow lights are a little 
bit expensive to buy and use. They are not as 
expensive as it is to run an electric cooker 24 
hours a day but they are still expensive to use 
all the same. 




113 



Figure 3.10 - The Sun. Picture by Inf3cted. 

When using a window grow try to place your 
plant near a window that gets the most 
sunlight. Sun comes up in east and sets in the 
west. It travels more north or south depending 
on which side of the equator you are. Think 
about it for awhile. Also remember that you 
have the seasons to think about. If you plan on 
a window grow try to establish when you want 
your plant to receive most of its light. You 
want your plant to get most of its light during 
flowering. If July is the best month for 
sunlight then you may consider producing your 





114 


seedling back in April or May or even as early 
as late March. Try to guess when you will get 
the best weather. Coordinate this with the 
flower times directed by the breeder and you 
will be able to foresee your harvest time. 

Also remember that people can look up and 
see your plant if they are sitting near the 
window. Do people come to wash your windows? 
Also remember that if you have a sativa plant 
then they will get big. Take all these factors 
into consideration when you are growing your 
plants with natural sunlight indoors. 

If you are growing indoors then you may 
have a room or part of a room that you wish to 
use such as an attic, closet, basement, spare 
bathroom or hot press. These locations nearly 
always need artificial light. You may even 
decide to build a cabinet yourself. There are 
many ways to set-up an indoor grow room. We 
will discuss this later in detail. 




115 



Figure 3.11 - Indoor Grow room. Picture by 

Kryptonite. 





116 


GENERAL OUTDOOR GROWING AND GUERRILLA FARMING 


Outdoor growing is growing on your own 
property outdoors. Guerrilla farming is growing 
away from your property in public areas or on 
someone else's property. For this part we will 
talk a bit about both. 



Figure 3.12 - Outdoor Grow. Picture by Mullummadman. 




117 


The biggest problem with outdoor growing is 
keeping your grow area secure and private. Some 
people will rip-off your plant in a second if 
they see what you have (Figures 3.13 and 3.14). 
Others will just call the cops. Security is 
vital. I once heard about a small hippy 
community who lived near a forest here and grew 
their marijuana near a stream. They eventually 
had to stop growing as their plants where being 
ripped-off by the locals in the town near by. 

It also must be understood that the thieves 
where not just teenagers either. Adults will do 
this too. In some cases where the cannabis 
industry is booming, rippers are professionals 
and this is their main source of financial 


income . 




118 



Figure 3.13 - This is a picture of an Outdoor grow 
that has been ripped off. The smaller image shows a 
picture of the plant before it was ripped off. 

Picture by Slowhand. 






119 



Figure 3.14 - This is another shot of a grow area 
that has been ripped off. As you can see rippers are 
without mercy. They would not even leave a little bit 
of branching so that the grower could take cuttings 
from his plant. Picture by Slowhand. 







120 


The best way to conceal an outdoor garden 
is to grow the Cannabis plants among other 
plants that will mask the cannabis. The other 
way is too grow the plants is inside a brick 
cubicle with a sheet of glass on top. Some of 
you may have the advantage of living out of 
town and have gardens in which this kind of 
stuff can be constructed. Hide your crop well. 
Everybody does not easily spot marijuana but 
someone who is trained to watch out for this 
plant will see it right away for what it is. If 
you feel that unwanted people may see your grow 
area then you might want to invest in some form 
of a greenhouse that has the windows painted 
white but the top glass left clear. The white 
walls will help reflect the direct sunlight 
coming down around your plants. 

Guerrilla growing is hard work and most 
often prone to rip-offs. By planting in a 
forest or in someone else's field you are not 
in any danger of being caught with the plants 
ON YOUR PROPERTY. Having said that the person's 
property that you planted on is at risk. Be a 
nice grower and do NOT plant on someone else's 
property. It is not a nice thing to do and 
looks bad on the cannabis growing community. 
Find a public area such as a forest or a hill 




121 


slope. Look for an area that is away from the 
public eye. Look for an area that will receive 
plenty of light. There are lots of places for 
this sort of thing. You have just got to spend 
time finding them. This is the key to guerrilla 
growing. Find a good patch and you will have 
good bud. 



Figure 3.15 - Photograph by Mullummadman. 


Your grow patch, whether on your own 
property or public property, must be treated. 



122 


Leaving seeds in the soil and coming back four 
months later is generally not going to get you 
good results. Two main things must be done to 
the patch to begin the grow, weeding and 
digging. 



Figure 3.16 - A night shot of an outdoor grow by 

Slowhand. 









123 


Some guerrilla farmers keep it simple. What 
they do is start their seedlings in small 
plastic pots indoors. When the seedlings have 
developed the grower cuts the bottom of the pot 
away. A small piece of cardboard is taped to 
the bottom of the pot. The plants, in their 
pots, are then taken to the grow patch. A hole 
is dug in the ground and the pot and plant is 
placed in the earth. The cardboard is removed 
and the hole is filled in with soil. That way 
you have germinated your plant and only need to 
worry about secondary factors such as light, 
security and pests. The roots will find their 
way out of the bottom of the pot and into the 
soil below. Don't worry about the roots not 
finding a way out of the pot. They always do, 
that is their job. 




124 



JB HH I W i Iv «_ ■ 

Figure 3.17 - Picture by Slowhand. 


Most outdoor growers favour this method. A 
patch near a river is ideal. Easy access to 
water helps if there is a short draught. 





125 



Figure 3.18 - This is another picture of some great 
cola shots by MullumMadman. 


GARDENING TOOLS 

Here is a list of the basic items that are 
needed to grow indoors and out. 

- Seeds. 

- Soil. 

- Propagation tray. 





126 


- Rockwool cubes. 

- Pots. 

- Support sticks. 

- Thread. 

- Watering can. 

- Water spray bottle. 

- Spider Mite spray. 

- Other bug sprays. 

- A pair of scissors. 

- A sharp knife. 

- Grow nutrients. 

- Rooting gels. 

- Growth enhancing fertilizers. 

- Large pitchfork. 

- Small shovel. 

As we advance to the latter stages of this 
book we will see that the grower can equip 
himself/herself with much more items that can 
help them on their quest for bigger buds! 




127 


MALE POTENCY 


The male plant is not a good smoke (Figure 
3.19). This however may not always be the case. 
Some strains have male plants that produce more 
THC than other males of a different strain. 
Sometimes the male can be stronger than a 
female from another weak strain. Most male 
plants from good genetics are stronger than the 
Ruderalis female. Males can be smoked or made 
into hash oil. Simply wait until the plant is 
flowering and then clip the top 6 inches of the 
plant away and remove the leaves. Throwaway any 
stems and branches. Cure these leaves and then 
find out for yourself if the male is any good 
or not. You may be in for a surprise. 




128 



Figure 3.19 - This is a good example of what a male 
plant looks like. Instead of pistils we have small 
round pollen sacks. The picture is from The Penguin. 




129 


SCUFFING SEEDS 

Most seeds that fail to start germinating 
do so because their shell is too hard to break 
open and allow water to seep in. At the end of 
your germination period you may have found that 
25% or more of your seeds have not managed to 
pop out. You can help these seeds to grow by 
using a method known as Scuffing. 

Simply get a small box, like a matchbox. 
Line the inside of the box with sandpaper. 

Place the seeds into the box. Cover the seeds 
with more sandpaper. Close the box and shake 
the seeds in the box for a few minutes. Now the 
seeds are scuffed and their outer shell should 
be easier to pop open. Plant these seeds in 
soil and they should be able to germinate. 




130 


Chapter 4 


SECURITY 


Before we go any further we should really 
address this topic because it crops up so 
often. Security is always an issue whether you 
are an outdoor or indoor grower. We have 
learned before that the best way to secure your 
grow area is too prepare yourself fully for any 
event that may occur in the foreseeable future. 

Pre-production security arrangements are 
very important. A sudden peak in your 
electricity bill may attract unwanted attention 
from certain authorities that look for these 
things. This may seem odd to you, but it does 
happen. 

It is now common practice that most 
countries who still have prohibition on 
cannabis plants set up special task squads to 
track down growers. The most often used 
technique by these agencies is tracking 
purchasing orders. Many agencies keep a tab on 
certain grow shops and look through the items 
that are being sold to outside customers. This 
tracking requires a special court order but the 




131 


police can obtain this with ease. If someone 
has been identified as buying suspicious grow 
products, then the agency will also try to find 
out what other things have been bought using 
the same credit card or another electronic 
money transfer medium. Many a grower have been 
caught out this way. The best way to avoid this 
system is to PAY CASH. 

Seed-banks are also sometimes tracked by 
certain agencies that watch for incoming mail 
with certain stamps and envelope headers. 
Sometimes it is not the agency that do the 
tracking but people themselves in the post 
office who want to rip you off. IT DOES HAPPEN, 
and quite a bit as well. To get around this 
most seed-banks do not head their mail anymore. 
If your seed-bank does head their mail with 
their company address it is best to keep away 
from that seed-bank in future. 

If you have done the right thing then you 
should have all your growing tools and kits 
bought via cash and your seeds purchased from a 
good seed-bank that has good seeds and a safe 
secure way of sending you their product. Many 
seed-banks use great stealth to get you your 
seeds. It is advised that you never have seeds 
sent to your grow area. 




132 


INDOOR SECURITY 

When growing indoors try to consider 
certain factors cropping up in the near future. 
Like visits from repairmen or gasmen. Some 
growers have a grow room which they can sweep 
clean in under 1 minute. This means that they 
have a closet near by where they can quickly 
move their plants too, if any visitors do pop 
up. 

Always keep your security closet near your 
grow area. It is no good walking around your 
house with five or more plants in your arms. It 
is a bad idea to use your toilet for the backup 
security area unless you have another one that 
the guest can use. 

Apart from this backup area the other thing 
you must consider with indoor security is the 
smell. Now Super Skunk and Skunk#l are very 
smelly plants. When the plant is in flowering 

she begins to stink.Hence the name - Skunk. 

If you live in an apartment complex then there 
is no way you will be able to hide the smell 
unless you have some form of an EXTRACTOR FAN 
or an OZONE GENERATOR (Figure 4.1). 





133 



Figure 4.1 - This is a home made Ozone Generator. 

Picture by Shipperke. 


In some indoor set-ups a fan can be used to 
extract any unwanted smell away from the 
corridor outside. It can be pumped through a 
window or filter to another area where the 
smell will not be noticed. Not only that but 
plants love fresh air and wind, so the fan can 
do two things at once for you. An Ozone 
generator is a device that can be purchased 
from most grow shops. It helps to get rid of 
cannabis odour problems. 





134 


Apart from the smell problem the other 
problem you will have is with fires. Now this 
is a very important thing to know about. Some 
people growing indoors tend to use very shoddy 
lights with even shoddier fixtures. 

NEVER EVER USE ANY LIGHTING KIT AND FIXTURES 
THAT ARE DAMAGED OR NOT SUITABLE FOR INDOOR 
GROWING. Many people have lost their homes 
because of this problem. Taking short cuts with 
lighting and electricity is a big no no. I have 
heard off and met many people who have come 
home only to find a fire brigade outside who 
have just finished putting out the fire which 
engulfed part of the house. The same thing 
happens in every case. The grower gets closer 
and sees a number of police officers looking 
around the room. The fire officer points to the 
cause of the fire - a half melted light fixture 
with burnt out sockets. The officer looks 
around and sees the plants all crispy and 
black. They both know what this is all about. 
Why do they know? Because they have seen it a 
hundred times before. 

New Marijuana growers nearly always make 
the mistake of creating inferior lighting set¬ 
ups. Needless to say that this is because of 
three things. (1) They don't have the right 




135 


information because of government censorship 
laws. (2) They do not have the money to invest 
in a proper lighting system. (3) They just want 
to grow their pot quick and fast and cheaply. 

We will discuss proper lighting systems in 
another chapter. 


OUTDOOR SECURITY 

As we have said before the best way to 
secure your outdoor garden plants is via a 
shelter. One must also remember that some 
outdoor plants do smell and this can carry over 
a short distance given the right wind and the 
right climate. Most people would not know what 
the smell is but some DO! Many growers get 
around this problem by growing cannabis plants 
that have very little smell during flowering. 
These types of strains are listed by most seed- 
banks. Again you should ask about strains that 
have low smell levels. All Cannabis plants 
smell to some degree during flowering. 




136 



Figure 4.2 - Nice Bud picture from RealHigh. 




137 



Figure 4.3 - An outdoor Haze plant by Slowhand. 

The other thing to do is to make sure that 
during harvest time you have harvested as 
quickly and as privately as possible. Standing 
over a small shelter putting cuttings of 
cannabis into a big black bag is not exactly 






138 


the most secure way to go about this. Some 
people go out to their garden with black 
plastic bags and drop the bag over the plant 
before pulling it up. This way you will not 
expose your crop to anyone. Some people do 
their harvesting at night. This is not 
recommended though as it can draw unwanted 
attention to you. 

If you are growing your plant outdoors in 
the open without a shelter and away from the 
general public then you may want to create a 
pen for your plants. A pen made from chicken 
wire will prevent any unwanted predators such 
as deer or rodents from eating your plants. 
Predators are a big problem with outdoor 
growing. We will talk about pests later. 

GUERRILLA GROWING SECURITY 

Tracks left behind from your ventures too 
and from your grow area are the worst give-away 
for any guerrilla farmer. People just love to 
walk through the woods and say "oh look a nice 
track, I wonder what is down there?". Try not 
to create a track when you go to your grow 
area. Even by visiting the same spot once every 
two weeks you will leave a trail that some 




139 


hikers might see and use. Try to access your 
grow through several different routes if you 
can. 



Figure 4.4 - This is a picture of a guerrilla grow 
deep in the woods. The cannabis is hidden low down in 
the foreground of this picture by Mullummadman. 



140 


As a guerrilla grower you should try to 
keep away from hacking through 100 feet of 
brambles to get to your grow site. When 
choosing a spot find an area that is not too 
dense but not too sparse either. Some Guerrilla 
growers have even created small grow baskets 
that they hang from trees away from the public 
eye. If the baskets are well camouflaged then 
you can get away with loads! 

As a guerrilla grower you should always 
wear gloves when handling your work. If you 
have buckets near by do not leave fingerprints 
on any of these. Also you will want to consider 
having a good reason for being in your grow 
area. Imagine that you are walking back from 
your path, with no crop on you, and a police 
man jumps out of the bush. He says - "What are 
you doing here?". Of course you know that there 
is a river near by so you show him your fishing 
rod or your binoculars and bird spotting book. 
There are many things you can take with you on 
your trip to make you look more like somebody 
else other than a cannabis grower. Many sites 
have been staked-out in the past by the 
authorities. Always check the area around your 
grow site for any people who may look 
suspicious. 




141 


The worst security time for any guerrilla 
grower is during harvest time. This is when you 
must go from your grow area to your home with 
your growing rewards. Always do this as early 
as possible in the morning just as the sun 
rises. Always double-check the area for any 
suspicious looking people. Pack your buds and 
plants into black plastic bags (brown paper 
bags are better) and then put these into a 
backpack. Walk towards the edge of the forest 
/woods/clearing and quickly drop your bag down 
against a bush and cover it up. Walk towards 
your car and look around again. Drive your car 
for about five minutes and look around to see 
if you can see anything. If you see anything 
suspicious, or anything following you leave the 
bag and go to town (not home - leave that until 
the situation is under control again). If 
things look okay, drive back to where you left 
your bag. Pick up your bag and put it in the 
boot or trunk of the car. Drive home carefully. 

Some people can get away with guerrilla 
farming lots of pot. This is commercial growing 
on a risky scale but can still be found in 
various parts of the world where cannabis is 
still banned. The growers usually live deep in 
the forest miles away from the nearest town. 




142 


They may spend up to 7 months out there on 
their own, cultivating the crop. Recent grow 
busts by the police have identified some 
several tons of bud being grown by as little as 
3 people living squat in some unknown region of 
British Colombia. 

There is not much more to outdoor growing 
than this. Most of the elements that you need 
to complete your outdoor grow are in the indoor 
growing chapter of this book. Read through this 
and it should give you ideas about how to treat 
your outdoor grow patch. 




143 


Chapter 5 

THE INDOOR CANNABIS GROW 


There are many ways to grow your cannabis 
plant indoors. The two core methods of indoor 
growing are soil growing and hydroponics. There 
is a separate chapter for hydroponics, and so 
this chapter will deal with soil growing. 



Figure 5.1 - Indoor Grow room. Picture by RealHigh. 






144 


There are many ways to grow an indoor soil 
garden. The most common indoor set-ups are: 

1.Bench growing, 

2.SOG growing, 

3.ScrOG growing 
4.Cabinet growing. 


We will discuss these methods in a moment but 
let us first see what they all have in common. 


LIGHTS 


Lights come in all shapes, sizes, wattage 
and type. A full indoor grow lighting kit 
should contain the following items. Bulb, 
reflector, ballast, timer and electrical 
inputs/outputs. 




145 





Figure 5.2 - Regular Bulb, 



Figure 5.3 - A reflector with bulb and ballast. 


rs 


On Tim 



Figure 5.4 - This is a picture of a timer. 






146 


Most lighting kits are open, meaning that 
no hood or glass will cover the bulb. It hangs 
directly under the reflector. The bulb is fixed 
into a socket that is attached to the inside of 
the reflector. That socket is connected to the 
ballast. The ballast can be internal or 
external. If external there will be a cord 
leading to the ballast from the bulb's socket. 
The ballast plugs into a domestic light socket 
like the one you have in your home. Some 
ballast types even have a built-in timer. 

When buying a lighting system it is 
recommend that you buy a complete system and an 
extra bulb. Check to make sure that the 
lighting system meets safety regulations and 
has some sort of guarantee with it. 




147 



Figure 5.5 - This is an example of what an external 
ballast looks like. You might be able to see the 

timer on top of it. 


LIGHT BANDS 


Light can be separated into a spectrum, 
which form the colours of the rainbow. Red, 
Orange, Yellow, Green, Blue, Indigo, Violet. 
Each of these lights mix down to give white 
light. Artificial lights, because of their 
nature, tend to lean towards a tint of one of 
these colours when they mix down to form white 
light. 

The electro-magnetic spectrum is a term 
used in lighting to describe the distribution 
of electro-magnetic radiation by reference to 
energy. This table roughly gives wavelengths. 




148 


frequencies, and energies for parts of the 
spectrum. You may find it useful. 


Spectrum of 
Electromagn 

etic 

Radiation 





Region 

Wavelength 

(Angstroms) 

Wavelength 

(Centimetres) 

Frequency 

(Hz) 

Energy 

(EV) 

Radio 

V 

o 

> 10 

< 3 x 10 9 

< lO- 5 

Microwave 

10 9 - 10 6 

10 -0.01 

3x 10 9 -3x 10 12 

10-5- 

0.01</sup> 

Infrared 

10 6 - 7000 

0.01 - 7 X 10-5 

3x 10 12 -4.3 x 10 14 

0.01 - 

2</sup> 

Visible 

7000 - 4000 

7 x 10-5 - 4 x 10-5 

4.3 x 10 14 -7.5 x 

10 14 

2 -3 

Ultraviolet 

4000 - 10 

4 x IQ' 5 - IQ' 7 

7.5 x 10 14 -3x 10 17 

3 - 10 3 

X-Rays 

10-0.1 

o 

i 

<1 

i 

o 

1 

so 

3x 10 17 -3x 10 19 

10 3 - 10 5 

Gamma Rays 

<0.1 

< 10-9 

>3x 10 19 

V 

o 


















149 


Here is the visible part of the spectrum. 



Plants are green, which means that Plants 
absorb light at the middle of the spectrum 
(Orange to Indigo). Cannabis plants need this 
part of the light spectrum to reach full 
growing potential. The intensity of the light 
is also important. A light that feeds the full 
bandwidth with all light spectrums will work 
very well - like sunlight. When dealing with 
artificial lights it is better to choose a 
light that concentrates its intensity on the 
top part of the spectrum. The most common 
indoor light systems are called HID lights. We 
will discuss the full range of lights that you 
may come across in some grow rooms. 






150 


POOR LIGHTING SYSTEMS 


Domestic Lights: 



Figure 5.6 - A domestic bulb. Also called an 
incandescent light source. 

These are the lights you find in use around 
your house. These lights come in all sizes and 
wattage - 30 watts to 150 watt. These lights 
are not suitable for growing because of their 
low light intensity and bad colour spectrum. 





151 


AVERAGE LIGHTING SYSTEMS 


Fluorescent Tube Lights: 


V 





Figure 5. 7 and 5.8 - These are examples of some fluro 
fixtures and bulbs that can be bought in most 

hardware stores. 





152 


These lights are the long industrial lights 
that are found in many a school and work place. 
These lights come in nearly all lengths and 
sizes. 2 to 10 feet are the main sizes that are 
out there. They also run between 10 watts and 
300 watts. These lights are okay for growing 
but they provide little light and are hard to 
set up properly. They also are not in best 
light spectrum for Cannabis plants to grow in. 

Halogen Lights: 



Figure 5.9 -A Halogen light. 





153 


Halogen lights are the small lights that 
can be seen on the outside of factories for 
flood lighting the grounds during the night. 
They are usually small and black. These lights 
can range anywhere between 75watts and 
4 0 0 Owatts. 

Halogens get extremely hot and can provide 
an unsuitable condition for growing Cannabis 
under. They are not recommended because they 
are dangerous to use indoors for growing. They 
are also not in the best light spectrum for 
growing Cannabis. 

Fluorescent White Tube Lights: 

These are not in use much and are very 
similar to the Fluorescent lights except they 
are in the correct growing spectrum. These 
lights are not very strong and do not range 
much above 200watts. They are only recommend 
for growers who do not want to grow full 
flowering cannabis plants. 




154 



Figure 5.10 - White Tube Light. 

BEST LIGHTING SYSTEMS 
Horticultural Lights: 


These lights are professional horticultural 
lights. They are developed by horticultural 
lighting companies and are tested to suit 
growing plants indoors. These lights are 
commonly called HID (High Intensity Discharge). 
Like the former lights these also come in kits 
with bulb, reflector, ballast and timer. They 
also come in different wattage and different 
shapes and sizes. If you want to grow good bud 
then you need a HID. A HID is the second most 
important purchase you will make next to 
choosing your strain. 





155 


Metal Halide (MH) and Mercury Vapour (MV): 


The lights are HID lights and are used for 
the seedling and vegetative growth stages of 
your plant. They can also be used for flowering 
and are quite good too. They come in all shapes 
and sizes and range from 75W - 4000watts. These 
lights are very common and are a good kit for 
the indoor Cannabis grower. 

Mercury Vapour is not as common as it used 
to be. It has almost been replaced by Metal 
Halide now. If you have a choice between the 
two it is best to stay with the new MH kits. MV 
also has a tendency to be slightly out of the 
optimal spectrum range. 

High Pressure Sodium (HPS): 


This is the lighting choice of many a 
Cannabis Cultivator. These lights come in all 
shapes and sizes and have a range of 75watts - 
4000watts. These lights are in the perfect 
spectrum for growing cannabis and come highly 
recommended. 




156 


j- -ir 



Figure 5.11 - This is an example of a HPS and also a 
MH Light system. There is nothing at face value to 
indicate that the light is a HPS or a MH. To check 
this out we need to look at the ballast and the bulb 
and read what is says about the type of light system 
that it is. MH lights tend to give off a blue tone, 
while HPS tend to give off an orange tone. 

WHAT TO LOOK FOR WHEN BUYING A LIGHT. 


The first thing to say is that some growers 
have a MH set-up for seedlings and vegetative 
growth and a HPS for flowering. The HPS is a 
better flowering lamp, while the MH is a better 
veg lamp. If we can only afford one we should 
get a HPS. Both MH and HPS can be used for 
vegetative growth and flowering. However since 
we are growing for bud, we should try to get 
the best HPS we can. 

The next thing they look for is the light 
kit itself. Check to see that the light is 




157 


certified and is in good shape. Then check to 
see if the light is air-cooled. Some of these 
lights have a fan built in which keeps the 
light cool. If you see this then you know that 
you are going to need somewhere to vent your 
air. This may mean that you need to adjust a 
wall in your grow area so that the air is 
extracted from the light. 



0 


Figure 5.12 - This picture shows two air-cooled hoods 
attached to their respective air ducts. This 
photograph is by Chimera. 










158 


Lights that are air-cooled (Figure 5.12) 
tend to last longer and do not heat up your 
grow area that much. Most expert growers like 
to keep a room at a stable controllable 
temperature and use these air-cooled lights to 
achieve that. If your light is not air-cooled 
then you will have to build an air vent and fan 
in your grow room wall to keep the temperatures 
under control. Cannabis leaves will burn if 
placed too close to a HID light. 



Figure 5.13 - This is a water-cooled light system. 
These inventions have been around for awhile but have 
not caught on that much because they require a good 
bit of work. A constant pump of cool water must be 
circulated into and out of the light system. 




159 


The next thing to check is how the light is 
supported. Does it require a light stand or 
does it require to be hung from the ceiling. In 
most cases you will be able to make your own 
stand if you feel that you are not willing to 
fasten a few hooks and chains to your ceiling. 
Also check to see if the electrical fittings 
suit your needs. Will they plug straight into 
your system at home or do you need an adapter? 
Maybe you might require an extension cord with 
your purchase. Most HID kits can only take a 
specific wattage of bulb and a certain type of 
bulb. If you have a 600W HPS system, then you 
should only use 600W HPS bulbs. Some lighting 
kits have something called a 'switchable 
ballast' (Figure 5.14). This means that you use 
both MH and HPS lights with the system. Check 
your kit for further details. 




160 



.Vtbftfc! riwjm 


Ballast Switch 

Figure 5.14 - This is a picture of what the switch 
looks like on a ballast that can take 2 HID types. 

The next thing to look for is the 
guarantee. Check to see what the manufacturer 
has said about this light and how long the 
guarantee is for. Last but not least is the 
most important part of your light. The wattage 
and lumens. 


WATTAGE AND LUMENS 


HID Lights can range anywhere between 75W 
and 4000W. In general the stronger the wattage 
the more light that bulb will produce. However 
we must also consider another factor and that 
factor is called Lumens. Lumens are the correct 
way of measuring how much light per square foot 
a bulb emits. Lumens and wattage do go hand in 
hand but can vary a large amount between 






161 


systems. The better the lighting kit, the 
better the lumens it will cast. Lumens have 
more to do with the design of the light than 
the wattage of the light itself. Some 600W 
lights may give the same lumens as a 400W 
light. Have a look at this chart: 


LAMP TYPE 

WATTS 

LUMENS 

M. V 

175 

8000 

M. H 

400 

36000 

H.P . S 

600 

45000 

H.P . S 

600 

36000 


This is interesting because we have two 
types of HPS lights using the same bulb wattage 
and one of the types is casting more Lumens 
than the other. The reason for this is that the 
higher lumens kit is better quality than the 
other. So we now know that some lighting kits 
produce better Lumens than others. Check 
through HID lighting kits and look at how many 
lumens they cast. This is a good indicator of 
how professional that light is. Also a 4000W 
HID is too much for one single plant. A IK bulb 
is the maximum limit per light you should use. 
Use several IK bulbs if you need more light. A 
4K bulb will bleach Cannabis and is very hot. 





















162 


LUMENS AND MARIJUANA GROWING 

Now for the big question. How many Lumens 
do I need? Well this depends on three things. 

(1) How much do you want to spend? (2) How many 
plants do you have? (3) How big is your grow 
area. 

You do not want to go less than 2500 
Lumens, even for one plant. You want to get the 
best so you need to hit the 45000 mark or more. 
In general one light that casts 45000 lumens is 
enough to cover a workspace of about 3 feet by 
3 feet. This is quite an average space and you 
will probably get anything between 6-9 plants 
in that area. Again we must keep in mind the 
strain that we are growing. One large sativa 
plant can cover a 9 square foot grow area in no 
time. Short indica plants are different. You 
can get maybe 12 plants into a 9 square foot 
grow area. If you really want to pump up your 
plants then you may consider a lamp that casts 
100,000 Lumens or more. If you want a bigger 
grow area then you may consider 2 lamps that 
cast 100,000 Lumens each. All is relative to 
how much you want to grow and the size of your 
grow room. 

Let's say for the record that we would like 




163 


to grow 4 plants. Then what we should aim for 
is a light that casts 45000 Lumens. This means 
we should buy a 600-Watt HID system. Let's say 
we want to pump up our available light to 
around 60,000 Lumens. This means we should buy 
a 1000-Watt HID system. If our area is bigger 
we might need 2 or more 1000-watt HID lights to 
achieve this. It all very respective to the 3 
elements we mentioned above. 

There is nothing wrong if you want to use a 
1000-watt HID light on 2 plants. They will grow 
bigger and better. The only thing is, do we 
really want to spend all that money on the 
light and the electricity bill? HID lights 
range anywhere between $220/£200 and $700/£670 
for a full kit. You may be able to buy the 
parts and build your own, but this is only 
recommended if you have some experience with 
lights first. A 600W HPS kit should cost about 
$250/£230. This is money well spent if you want 
great plants with big buds. 

Over time you will understand more about 
grow rooms and how to light them properly. With 
experience you should be able to tell what 
light suits your needs. As a general rule, when 
in doubt buy a 400W HPS or better. 




164 


LIGHTING FACTORS AND HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM 

YOUR LIGHT 

The reflector part of the lighting kit can 
also cause a difference in lumens cast between 
two different systems using the same bulb. The 
reflector does it exactly what is says. It 
reflects light. The other thing to consider is 
that when the light bounces off the reflector 
it is going to fall down on your plant. When it 
does your plants will absorb this light. Not 
all of the available light is picked up by the 
plant and some of the light will escape and 
reflect off your workbench. Your bench may even 
absorb some of the light. This is your light 
that you are spending money on so why not try 
and do something about saving this escaping 
light. Some reflectors are very good and some 
are very poor. Reflectors should not be any 
colour other than white or polished metal. Some 
reflectors may have a small green film of 
plastic covering their insides. Remove this if 
you can. It should just pull off like a piece 
of tape. 

Many people get mirrors or tin foil and 
line their grow area with it. This is NOT good. 




165 


MIRRORS ABSORB LIGHT. This means that only a 
small amount of your light is reflected back 
towards your plant. What you need is something 
white. White is the best colour for reflecting 
light, period. Not shiny glossy white, just 
plain 'flat' white. A white wall will reflect 
more light that a mirror will. Many growers 
like to paint the walls of their grow 'flat' 
white. This helps a lot. Other people like to 
line their grow area with the back end of tin 
foil wrapping (the white side). This is okay, 
but make sure that you use the white side and 
not the shiny side. 

A substance which looks like a tin foil 
sheet, called Mylar (Fig. 5.15), is very 
popular in cannabis grow rooms. Instead of 
using white walls you can use this reflective 
alternative. Most DIY and hardware stores will 
sell it in roles. 










166 



Figure 5.16 - Mylar in the grow room by Shipperke 


It is also recommend that you keep a spare 
bulb at all times in case your other bulb dies. 
It is no good going down to the local hardware 
store only to find that they are out of the 
bulb type that you need. This could leave your 
plants without light for along time. 



167 


It is also wise to remember that plants 
need water and lights use electricity. Both 
these factors when mixed are extremely 
dangerous. Be safe and wise and keep all 
electrical outlets away from your plant and 
liquids that you use. 

Okay so you have your grow area set-up with 
all your security arrangements met. You have 
your lights set up and hanging down over your 
grow area. You also have some form of light 
reflection around your plants to help conserve 
your light. Your seed-bank has sent you your 
seeds and you have germinated them. They are on 
a tray next to you and you are preparing to 
transplant them into larger pots. The larger 
pot will stay with the plant throughout its 
life cycle and you need to provide the best 
medium possible in which your plant will grow. 




168 



Figure 5.17 - Nice Indica plant from 
BushyOlderGrower. 











169 


SOIL 


Soil comes in many types and varieties. 

What you will find as you go along is that you 
will add various ingredients to your soil to 
improve plant growth. 

The Cannabis plant will grow long and 
winding roots into the soil. These roots absorb 
water and other minerals from the soil to help 
it grow. The soil also goes through dry periods 
when you do not water your plant or when the 
plant has absorbed most of the water. During 
these dry periods air is allowed to creep in 
between the soil particles, allowing the roots 
to breathe. 

There are 3 main factors to look at when 
buying soil. (1) pH, (2) Nutrients and (3) 
Structure. 


pH 


pH is a way of measuring how much acid and 
alkaline is in the soil. The pH scale runs from 
1-14. 7 is neutral, 0 is very acidic and 14 

is very alkaline. Cannabis plants in soil like 
a pH of 7. When choosing your soil you should 




170 


be looking for a pH of 7. It should tell you 
this on the bag. Going above or below this mark 
can cause your plant problems during growth. 
Small pH meters (Figure 5.18) can be bought in 
most gardening shops and can be used to measure 
the overall pH of your soil. 



Figure 5.18 - This is a picture of two cheap pH 
meters that can be purchased from most grow shops. 


NUTRIENTS 


The three major nutrients that are found in 
soil are Nitrogen, Phosphorous and Potassium or 
NPK for short. NPK can come in two forms - with 
the soil or as a stand-alone fertilizer 
(usually in a bottle). When you look at the bag 




171 


you will see that the % of each part is stated. 
Such as 20:20:20. This means 20% N, 20% P, 20% 
K. The remaining 40% is just other elements 
that make-up the soil. In liquid it would 
usually be water. This ratio can change between 
different types of nutrient and soil brands so 
we need to understand what Cannabis likes. 

Cannabis plants like good levels of N and a 
normal level of P and K during vegetative 
growth. You need to pick a bag that has all 
three, not just 10:20:0. When looking at 
chemical fertilizers you need a mixture that 
has the first number higher or equal to the 
rest. 12-12-12 is fine, 20-20-20 is fine, 12-6- 
6 is fine and 18-4-5 is fine. The 12-12-12 and 
20-20-20 are the best ones to find. Something 
like 8-20-20 is not suitable for vegetative 
growth. Bags with higher P are for flowering 
plants. As a grower we do not transplant to new 
soil for flowering. We simply use plant feeds 
to bring up the P levels during flowering. 

STRUCTURE 

Try to find a soil that is not too moist. 

In other words try to find a soil that dries 
out well and does not hold water like mud. It 




172 


should say on the packet whether the soil is a 
wet or dry one. Try to find a balance between 
the two. Wet soil will sometimes cause plant 
damage because your roots need air to breathe. 
Dry soil may also dry out too quickly and needs 
to be watered more often. Try to find a soil 
that is loose and feels fine but slightly heavy 
in your hands. 

Basically the soil structure is up to you. 
Do not buy anything that is hard and bulky or 
too soft and weightless. Medium Soft and heavy 
is what you want. 

SOME COMMON SOIL TYPES 


There are many more types of soil mediums 
out there and here we will briefly go through a 
few. Marijuana can be grown in most of these 
soil types but you will see that there may be 
some problems with a few of them. 




173 


Sand and Silts: 



Figure 5.19 - Sand. 


Sand soils can be pure sand or a mixture of 
sand and soil. The problem with sandy soil is 
that it drains water and minerals out too 
quickly. This means that it is a very dry soil 
and not suitable for our needs. These soils can 
waste our time and money. 


Silt soils are nearly the same as sand soil 
except they are more clay-like and of a darker 
colour. Silts hold nutrients well but do not 
hold water very well. Like sands they are prone 
to quick drainage. Sands and Silts are rarely 










174 


used on their own to grow cannabis. Mostly it 
is mixed with other soil types. 

Clay: 



Figure 5.20 - Clay 


Is a stiff tenacious fine-grained earth 
consisting of hydrated aluminosilicates that 
become flexible when water is added. Marijuana 
roots do not really like clay. Clay can rarely 
be used on its own to grow Cannabis. Mostly it 
is mixed with other soil types. 




175 


Loam: 



Figure 5.21 - Loam 


Loams tend to be a mix of all of the above. 
The combination of the mix is always stated on 
the bag. In fact, in most cases normal soil 
that you buy in the shops has sand, silt and 
clay mixed in with it. When you encounter a bag 
of soil it is nearly always going to be a Loam. 
Loams are very fertile soil composed chiefly of 
clay, sand, and humus. They are highly 
recommended. It must be noted at this point 
that you do not want to bring natural outdoor 
soil in. This is because the soil may not be 
sterile and it may contain bugs and pests. 
Always buy soil from a gardening shop. Soil is 
the cheapest part of your grow. 




176 


Humus: 



Figure 5.21 - Humus 


Is the organic constituent of soil, formed 
by the decomposition of plant materials and can 
be bought in bags at the local gardening shop. 
Most of these products try to eliminate bugs 
and other living matter from the soil but 
sometimes this is not 100% successful. Don't be 
too surprised if you find a worm or green fly 
in the package. Humus is also sometimes known 
as compost, but compost is the final mixture of 
manure (which is of organic origin), loam soil 
and some other mediums with added organic 
matter. Humus is that added organic matter 
stuff. 





177 


POTS 



Figure 5.22 - Pots 


Basically pots come in all shapes and 
sizes. Marijuana plants are best kept in pots 
that are somewhat large (1.5 - 3 gallon pots) 
because cannabis does grow long roots. 

Also you are better off buying a pot that 
has some form of perforations (holes) at the 
bottom. The perforated pot sits on a small dish 
(you should be able to buy these at the same 
time you buy your pots). When you water your 
plant some of the water may drain down through 
the soil and come out through the perforations 
and into the dish. The dish should be emptied 
if this happens to avoid water spills. 




178 


More advanced growers use pots that do not 
contain perforations at the bottom. This is 
because advanced growers never water or feed 
their plants too much. If you over-water your 
plant, these perforated pots will drain some of 
the water through to the dish. What happens is 
that the water may also leech down some of the 
nutrients that you have added to your soil. 
Over-watering can cost you time, wasted 
nutrients and even kill your plant. 

Before you use a pot make sure that you 
clean it thoroughly before use to get rid of 
any unwanted chemicals or dust that may have 
gathered in the shop or factory. 

Pots are very cheap to buy. It is always 
best that you only use one pot per plant. If 
there is a problem with the soil, watering or 
nutrients then only one plant will feel the 
effects. 




179 



Figure 5.23 - Picture by Chrisesq. 





180 



Figure 5.24 - This is a great picture of a method 
known as double-potting which helps create a thicker 
stem. During vegetative growth the bottom of the top 
pot is cut away and is placed on top of a new pot 
with fresh soil. The roots grow right on down into 
the next pot. Look at the size of the cola in this 

picture by GIYO. 











181 


CONTINUING YOUR INDOOR SOIL GROWING 


So at this stage you now have the best soil 
that you can get your hands on. You take the 
seedling and make the transplant. You fill in 
the empty areas of the new pot with more soil. 
You pat down the top of soil lightly and you 
apply the stake if needed to support your 
plant. You also add a small amount of water to 
your plant and you place the pot on the bench 
under the light. You will leave the light on 24 
hours a day and watch as your plant grows over 
the weeks from its seedling cycle to its 
vegetative state. 



Figure 5.25 - A Picture of seedlings finishing 
their seedling stage and going into vegetative 

growth. By Vic High. 





182 



Figure 5.26 - Top shot of an Indica plant in veg 


by Ralpheme. 


INDOOR VEGETATIVE GROWTH 


During your plants vegetative cycle it will 
begin to grow quickly and produce more leaves 
and new branches. The stem will also grow 
thicker. This is when your plant begins to look 
like a marijuana plant. 





183 


WATERING 

Water your plant ever second or third day 
or better still when they dry out. Never let 
the soil dry out completely for long periods of 
time. I find that the following method works 
best with good size pots. 

Day A - watering. Day B - let dry. Day C - let 
dry. Day D - check soil and water if needed. 

This really does depend on the size of your 
pots though. If you pick up your pot when it is 
dry and pick up the same pot when it is has 
been watered, you can tell the difference in 
weight. This is a good way to judge if your 
pots need water or not. 

It is easy to see signs of over-watering. 
Watch your plants after you have watered them 
for the next 2-3 days. Do the fan leaves 
point outwards to receive more light? Or do 
they wilt downwards and look like claws. If 
they wilt then you may be under-watering or 
over-watering. Check the soil. Is it dry? If it 
is then add more water. If it's wet, then leave 
the soil dry out for more time until your 




184 


leaves pick up again. You will eventually 
understand more about your plants needs as it 
grows along. What you need to do is form a 
pattern or relationship with your plants 
watering needs. 

Over-watering does kill plants if the 
watering continues. If this happens let it dry 
out and hope for the best. Use a fan near the 
surface of the soil if you can. You may find 
that you need to water everyday because your 
light may be discharging a lot of heat. 

Your plant needs all the light it can get 
in vegetative growth. Leave your light on 24 
hours a day and enjoy watching your plant as it 
grows . 


ADJUSTING YOUR LIGHTS 

If you have a good stand or light support 
you will be able to lower or heighten your 
light. This is great because the closer your 
light is to the plant the more light it will 
receive. However make sure it is not too hot or 
it will burn your leaves. If you can keep your 
hand at a certain area under the light and not 
feel discomfort then your plants should do okay 
too. If you feel discomfort, so will your 




185 


plants. Use common sense and adjust your lights 
accordingly. 

Some Cannabis plants can grow as fast as an 
inch a day! So you need to watch out that your 
plant does not push up against the light. Be 
safe and know your plants grow rate before 
attempting to place your light very close to 
the plant. 

If you do suffer a burn use a pair of 
clippers to remove the burnt areas. This is 
only advised for light burns and not for soil 
or nutrients burns. 




186 


Chapter 6 

THE BASICS OF 

INDOOR ENVIRONMENT CONTROL 


By now you have managed to set up the basic 
environment in which your indoor plant will 
grow. As a gardener you have total control over 
that environment and need to make sure that it 
meets your plants needs. 

SOIL CONTROL 


As your plant grows through its life cycle 
it begins to absorb some of the minerals from 
the soil. When it does remove minerals it adds 
some waste material of its own. We have said 
before that Cannabis plants like a steady pH of 
around 7. The removal of nutrients and addition 
of waste material on top of other factors may 
cause this pH to increase or decrease. 




187 


pH CONTROL 

It is always good to check the pH at least 
once every week for plants that grow in soil. 
It is also good to check the soils pH a day or 
two after you feed your plant. A pH test kit 
can be purchased in most grow shops. The 
electronic test kits can be a bit expensive 
though. If you find that your soil's pH has 
shifted out of the 6-8 range you may want to 
try and bring the pH back to 7. Again, below 7 
is acidic and above 7 is alkaline. There are 
two ways to do adjust the ph of the soil. The 
first is called a soil flush and is not 
recommended but may be needed under certain 
circumstances such as serious pH fluctuations 
and chemical burns. 


SOIL FLUSH 


A soil flush is a last resort 'time to save 
our dying plant' manoeuvre. You only resort to 
a soil flush when all else has failed. Let us 
pretend for a moment that you have a soil that 
holds a lot of water and you want to feed your 
plant. You take out your favourite feeding 
bottle and you decide that you want to add it 




188 


straight to your plant and then pour water in 

after. This is never recommended! Always mix 
your food with water in a container and then 
use the container on your plant, such as a jug 
or watering can. Try follow the guidelines on 
the feeding bottle along with the 
recommendations in the book. If not the 
following story may happen! So you open the cap 
and bend it over towards the soil. You flinch, 
the bottle spills. The next thing you know half 
of your raw feeding liquid has managed to find 
it's way into the soil. You curse yourself that 
you did not follow the instructions. You grab 
your hair, 'What to do?' you say. You pick up 
this book and turn to this chapter. You read 
about the soil flush and see that your plant 
now has a small chance of survival. You know 
that all the raw chemicals will kill your 
plant. All hope is lost. This is your last 
resort. Here is how to flush your soil. 

STEP A. 

(1) Take the plant to a sink. 

(2) Turn the plant on its side making sure that 
you do not break the stem! 

(3) If you think the stem will break then 
quickly find a long stick and place it in the 




189 


soil. 

(4) Use a piece of sowing thread to tie the 
plant to the stick at several points. 

(5) Tape the stick to the pot. 

(6) Tilt the plant on its side so that the top 
of the pot with the soil is facing at an angle 

towards the sink. 

(7) Watch the colour of the liquid that runs 

out. 

(8) Do this until all the liquid has poured 

through. 

STEP B. 

IF YOU HAVE HOLES AT THE BOTTOM OF THE POT USE 
THIS METHOD OTHERWISE USE STEP C. 

(1) Pull your plant back up and sit it in the 
sink. Pour lots of water on top of the soil. 

(2) Wait until the water flows out the bottom 
of the pot. Look at the colour of the flow. 

(3) Repeat this process until the colour of the 
water becomes clearer. (The soil should get 

very muddy when you do this and some of the mud 
will pass out with the water.) 

(4) Once the water is clear tilt your plant on 
its side again and wait for all the water to 

drain out. You may repeat this process several 
times. If your feeding solution does not have a 




190 


colour then you should keep an eye on the 
texture and smell of the solution that you are 
flushing out. When this changes your flush has 

worked. 

(5) Quickly take your plant to a warm dry area 
and wait for the soil to dry out. 

(6) Use a pH meter to test the pH of your soil. 

(7) Follow step D. 

STEP C. 

IF YOU DO NOT HAVE HOLES AT THE BOTTOM OF YOUR 

POT 

(1) You can use a screwdriver to make holes in 
your pot if it is light and the plastic is not 
tough. You can always use thick masking tape 
later to patch the holes closed. If you can do 
this then do and follow step B. 

(2) If you can not then you need to do an 
emergency transplant. 

(3) Quickly set up a new pot and put in new 
soil leaving a large gap in the middle where 
your plant will go in. 

(4) Take your plant and use a knife to cut 
around the edge of the soil as close to the rim 
of the pot as possible. Go as deep as you can. 

(5) Put you fingers in down around the inside 
of the rim and pull the plant out of the pot. 




191 


Try not to rip the roots. 

(6) Hold the soil over the sink and place it 
down near the drain holding it together with 
your hands. If your root mass is big you may 

need help doing this. 

(7) Turn on the water and let it run slowly 

down over the soil. 

(8) Keep holding the plant for a number of 
minutes until you see a change in the water 
that is coming out from the soil. Do not crush 
the soil just hold it. It will get muddy and it 
will break up a bit, but this is to be 

expected. 

(9) When the water changes quickly place the 
plant into the new pot. 

(10) Fill up the spaces with new soil and use a 
stick to prop up your plant if needed. 

(11) Quickly take your plant to a warm dry area 

and wait for the soil to dry out. 

STEP D. 

(1) Every day measure the pH of the soil. If 
you have flushed your plant properly it should 
return to the near 7 mark (given that the water 
you use is a neutral pH of 7). In the meantime 
you can be reading about how to change your 
plant's pH as directed below. 




192 


It is sad to say but very few plants do 
survive such an emergency soil flush. The soil 
flush is, in its essence, over-watering your 
plant to the point of removing most of the 
minerals and ingredients in the soil. If your 
plant manages to pull through you have done 
well. If your plant does not then you will know 
better next time. A soil flush causes the plant 
a great deal of shock and should only be 
attempted as a last resort if your plant is 
dying and can not be cured by any other means. 

If your plant makes it, the plant may have 
sustained some damage. If any of the leaves are 
burnt or look dead you can remove them from the 
plant by clipping them away. Plants usually 
take about 2 weeks to get back to full health. 

pH - bringing back to neutral from acidic: 


If the pH of your soil is too acidic then 
you may want to bring it back to a natural 7. 
What you need is Lime. Lime can be bought in 
small containers from any grow shops. Just 
simply add some lime to your soil the next time 
you water your plant. Only add small amounts 
each time and then the next day use the pH 




193 


meter to study the effects. What you will find 
is that you will get to know your soil better 
than I could describe here and know what it 
needs. Advanced growers know how much lime they 
need to bump their acidic soil back to 7. They 
know this by trial and error. This is one thing 
about cannabis growing. The best cannabis 
growers grow good cannabis because they have 
made many mistakes in the past. Learning is an 
experience and that is why people enjoy 
growing. They like to learn more and experience 
more. Don’t let a bad growing encounter put you 
off. 

pH - bringing back to neutral from Alkaline: 


If the pH of your soil is too alkaline then 
you may want to bring it back to a natural 7. 

To correct this you need to make your soil more 

acidic. Here is a list of ingredients that can 

each be used to return your plants PH to 7. 

-Cottonseed meal 
-Lemon peels 
-Ground coffee 

-Some Fertilizers also are very acidic and can 
bring the pH down to 7. 




194 


When using this method always moderately 
apply the substance and check the pH. Over time 
you will know what measures to use. This is 
best left up to the grower as he/she will know 
how big their pot is and how much should be 
added. Experiment a bit and learn as you go 
along. 

pH up / pH down: 


These products are available in most grow 
shops. They actually act as a pH agent for 
adjusting your soil pH. They only come in two 
forms - pH up and pH down. More and more people 
are using these chemicals to adjust their soil 
pH. 


NUTRIENT CONTROL 

Remember NPK? Well, NPK are the primary 
ingredients that are needed in soil for 
marijuana to grow well. NPK stands for 
Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Potassium. In addition 
to these there is something called secondary 
supplements. Secondary supplements are found 




195 


within the soil but sometimes not all of them 
are there. The secondary supplements are as 
follows. Ca (calcium). Mg (magnesium), and S 
(sulphur). CaMgS for short. There are also 
seven more micronutrients. These are as 
follows: iron, boron, chlorine, manganese, 
copper, zinc, and molybdenum. 

These micronutrients are not extremely 
important for good plant health, but the 
secondary nutrients and Primary nutrients are. 
Check your bag to see if it has some secondary 
nutrients. 

Sometimes a Ca, Mg, or S deficiency in the 
soil may cause growing problems for your plant. 
If the soil is lacking one of these factors 
your plant may start to display a nutrient 
deficiency. Mg problems are common. To correct 
this feed your plant a 1/3 of a spoon full of 
Epsom salts per 3 gallons of water every 3-4 
weeks. 

If your soil does not have these properties 
and you feel that you are going to have future 
problems then simply find a feeding product 
that contains these elements. Next time you 
feed your plant you will be able to supplement 
it with these missing secondary nutrients. 

Micronutrient problems rarely show 




196 


themselves unless there is a problem with 
lockout. Lockout is a chemical reaction that 
takes place among the nutrients in the soil. It 
can occur if a large amount of one single 
nutrient is added. This can lockout the other 
nutrients, preventing your plant from using 
them. If lockout does occur then you need to 
flush your soil. 


FEEDING 

Feeding is the process of adding to your 
soil what the plant has taken out. You will 
only need 3 types of feeding solutions 
throughout your plants growth. You will need a 
bottle of feed where the NPK has equal or 
higher levels of N than P and K and you will 
also need a bottle that has higher levels of P 
than N and K. The first one is to be used 
during vegetative growth and the second is for 
flowering. You will also need a third bottle of 
secondary nutrients. 

You should only feed your plants when they 
need it. The amount of feeds that you will use 
is relative to your growing conditions and 
strain. Most plants only need to be feed every 




197 


fortnight at 50% or less than what it says on 
the label. Marijuana plants burn easily. So 
never mix your solution at 100%. If it says use 
1 cap full of feed per 3 gallons of water, then 
use 1 cap full per 6 gallons of water. 

Sometimes you might even end up burning them 
using these low levels. This goes for both 
flowering, secondary nutrients and veg feeds. 
You should never have to feed cannabis plants 
once a day. During flowering simply switch the 
feeding bottle over to the one with the NPK 
where P has higher levels than N and K. You may 
want to add secondary nutrients once every 3 
weeks to your grow. Epsom salts is a great way 
of giving your plant Mg, which is probably the 
most important secondary nutrient. 

AIR 


During vegetative growth and flowering, 
cannabis plants love to get fresh air. Always 
keep a window open and let your grow room 
refresh itself every day. The fresher the air 
the better. Also during the dry periods, in 
between watering, the roots like to breathe. 
Fresh air is always the best air. During winter 
you may want to reduce the time you leave the 




198 


windows open as the cold may stunt growth. Just 
refresh the air in your room for 15 - 20 
minutes during winter and close it again. 

If your grow is enclosed, then use fans to 
extract the old air and another fan intake to 
refresh the system. 


HUMIDITY 


Cannabis plants work best in the 40 - 80 
percent relative humidity area. rH (relative 
humidity) is the amount of water in the air. 
Fresh air always is the best way to control 
humidity. If you have a rH measuring kit you 
can judge for yourself how much fresh air you 
need before hitting the optimum 60% level. 

There are some expensive devices called De¬ 
humidifiers that control humidity in the room. 
This is not recommended unless you have a very 
large grow area underway. Just use fresh air 
and you can't go wrong. 

TEMPERATURE 


Temperature is controlled by any heating 
unit or natural sunlight that your room 
receives. Normal households have suitable 




199 


temperatures for growing cannabis in. The best 
meter for temperature control is the human 
body. If you find it is too cold in your grow 
room then so will your plants. 75 degrees 
Fahrenheit is what you should aim for. Slightly 
warmer rooms do help plants to grow a bit 
quicker. Use a thermometer to analyse your 
room's temperature. If too cold, turn on the 
heating. If too hot, open a window and maybe 
even use a fan. 

C02 (CARBON DIOXIDE) 

Plants enjoy C02 and release 02 during a 
process called photosynthesis, but more 02 is 
released than C02. Since our plants would like 
more C02, the grower can use a C02 generator to 
help the plants growth. C02 also helps grow 
bigger buds! Since room C02 levels in general 
are low the plants can use a bit more. 




200 


FANS 



Figure 5.27 - This is a regular squirrel cage fan. 
These fans come in all sizes and can be bought in 

most hardware stores. 



201 


Fans can be placed quite close to mature 
marijuana plants. Cannabis plants like the wind 
if it is a slight breeze because it helps them 
to develop stronger stems and branches. Also 
fans circulate the air around your plants. 

Fans help create an environment which makes 
the plant think that it is outdoors. Get a fan 
if you can. It is worth it and will help you 
grow a better plant! 




202 


Chapter 7 


PRE-FLOWERING AND FLOWERING 


THE END OF VEGETATIVE GROWTH 

By now you have managed to set up the basic 
environment in which your indoor plant will 
grow. You have your plants in some pots under a 
grow light with some white surfaces nearby and 
some fresh air in the room. You have also been 
watering your plant properly and you have been 
adjusting the pH and Nutrients in the soil. 

Everyone makes mistakes on their first time 
growing. Very few get to this stage without 
problems, so don’t feel too bad if you did not 
get it right. Growing marijuana is like riding 
a bike. Once you get it, it is hard to forget. 

You have been adjusting your lights and 
watching your plants grow. If you have not had 
any problems your plants should have a number 
of nodes and a small leaf mass at the top of 
your plant which you know is going to form the 




203 


next set of leaves and branches. 


Your leaves should be flat and stretched 
out. If they are, then your plant is enjoying 
its environment. If not then maybe you should 
consider turning to our problem solver chapter 
to see what has gone wrong. 

You have been watching the height of your 
plant every week and now the plant is becoming 
more like the picture of the strain that you 
viewed in the seed-bank brochures. Then one day 
you notice that the plant is not growing much 
taller anymore. It seems to have stopped. You 
take a closer look and see that there appears 
to be small new growths at most of the nodes 
between the stem and the branch. This is new to 
you. These have not developed before so you ask 
yourself, "what are they?" 

Your plant is now reaching the end of its 
vegetative stage. These small new growths are 
going to produce more leaf, branches and 
FLOWERS. The plant is now entering its Pre¬ 
flowering stage. 




204 


PRE-FLOWERING 


Now is the time when you should be hoping 
for as many females as possible and that all 
your work has not been in vain. You closely 
look at the new growths (Calyx) to see if you 
can identify your plants sex, but it is still 
too early to tell. 

The early stages all look the same you say? 
What should you do now? You do not know? You 
will have to wait and see. 

There are three things that can reveal your 
plant's sex early on but these are not 100% 
accurate. They are more of an educated guess. 

So remember these methods can fail to be 
accurate but most of the time they are a good 
indicator. 

First Early Sexing Method: 


If you have been growing the same strain 
and all the seeds at the same time, then you 
may notice that some plants are taller than 
others. This is a sign that the smaller plants 
are female and the taller ones are male. 


If you want too, you can separate your 




205 


plants into two sections in order to see how 
good your guesswork was when you do finally 
identify sex. The other thing to know is that 
male plants in general start to pre-flower 
before females. If you have taller plants that 
are producing new growths before the smaller 
ones, then the taller plants are probably male. 

Second Early Sexing Method. 


A good way to identify plant sex at early 
date is to look at the calyx with the aid of a 
very fine magnifying glass. (See last page of 
this book for pre-flowering/calyx illustration) 
If the calyx is raised on a stem then it is 
probably a male. If the calyx is not raised on 
a stem then it is probably a female. 

Third Early Sexing Method. 


Force-flowering a cutting is probably the 
best early sexing method out there. Simply take 
a cutting from the plant that you want to sex 
and place the cutting in a cup of water or into 
a cloning medium such as rockwool. Give the 
cutting 12 hours light and 12 hours total 
darkness. The cutting will flower and display 




206 


its sex. Clones will carry the exact same 
genetic make-up as the plant it came from, 
including sex. 

These methods are NOT 100% accurate but 
will help you to understand more about the 
visible differences between male and female 
plants. In a moment we will explain how to 
identify sex properly and completely. 

THE PRE-FLOWERING TIME 


Your plant will Pre-flower between 1 and 2 
weeks and during this period the new growth 
regions begin to change shape depending on 
whether the plant is male or female. It is 
during this shape change that you can properly 
detect your plant’s sex. 

WHEN TO FLOWER? 

Pre-flowering is a sign that your plant is 
mature enough to start flowering. As a grower 
you have a simple choice to make. Do you want 
to flower now? Or do you want to continue 
vegetative growth? Here are a few facts before 
you make that choice. 




207 


- Most cannabis plants can be kept alive for up 
to 10 years by simply keeping a light on the 
plant at all times. These plants will grow to a 
certain height and then form into a bush. It 
will then eventually stop producing branches 
and will spend the rest of its life growing new 
leaves to replace the old ones. 

- Bud production is not equal to the height of 
your plant. Bud production is equal to your 
growing environment, your strain's genetic 
make-up and the amount of nodes that the plant 
has. All nodes are potential bud areas, but 
every strain has a genetic threshold for bud 
production. 

- It possible to get more bud with lots of 
plants which are flowered as soon as they are 
mature (which also keeps them shorter and 
smaller), than extending vegetative growth with 
less plants until they reach their maximum 
height and size. The time frame for the shorter 
option may also produce more bud turnover per 


annum. 




208 



Figure 7.1 -A Picture of a large indoor grow by 


Vic High. 

Keeping these things in mind, you can 
either choose to flower now or choose to keep 
your plant growing until it reaches its size 
threshold before you start flowering. If you 
take the longer route then prepare to have the 
space for it, because when you flower most 
cannabis strains they can sometimes more than 
double in height and width. 





209 


If you have pre-flowers and want to flower 
you only have to do one thing. You must put 
your plants under a 12/12 schedule. 



Figure 7.2 - A Picture of an indoor grow by 

Mia Stoner. 




210 


THE ALL-IMPORTANT 12/12! 

Most people never get good results or bud 
quantities from cannabis plants because they 
have never heard of 12/12. 

12/12 is easy to explain. Cannabis plants 
grow outdoors naturally between the months of 
April to October/November. This means that 
towards the Sept/Oct/Nov dates the plants will 
be in flowering. During this time the days get 
shorter and the nights get longer. When this 
occurs the plant is under 12 hours of light and 
12 hours of darkness. When this 12/12 
PHOTOPERIOD occurs the plant is naturally 
stimulated to flower. If the 12/12 continues 
then the plant will produce its flowers. As 
long as 12/12 continues the flowers will grow 
larger and more plentiful. This is part of the 
cannabis plants evolution and how it has taught 
itself when to flower. Naturally as a grower we 
want lots of flowers so we need to put the 
plant through a light cycle of 12/12. This 
means that we must turn our lights on and off 
at these given ratios. 

During pre-flowering you will either 
manually turn on your lights for 12 hours and 




211 


turn off your light for 12 hours everyday or 
you will use an automatic timer. If your light 
comes with a timer set the timer to do this. 
Throughout the 12 hours of darkness it is best 
to keep your grow area as dark a possible. A 
small desk light at the other side of your room 
will cause your plant not to react properly to 
12/12 which will result in continued vegetative 
growth. In fact any light that penetrates the 
darkness will stop your plants from flowering 
properly. That means that your grow room must 
be sealed to the point where it is completely 
light proof. If you want to learn how to do 
this perfectly then I suggest that you read up 
on 'Photography Dark Rooms', either on the 
Internet or in your local library. 

Photographers use common items that can be 
bought in most hardware shops to make their 
film-processing rooms light tight. If you can 
replicate their ideas (basically a thick black 
screening around the doorframes or any open 
light points) then you will have a great system 
for flowering plants in. I think most of you 
would have done this by now anyway if you 
listened and took the advice on covering your 
grow with either Mylar or white walls/boards. 

If you have prevented any light from leaking 




212 


out, then you have prevented light from leaking 
in ! 


Problems with 12/12 


If you switch to 12/12 before pre-flowers 
have shown then you may encounter the following 
problems. 

- Stress related sex problems (Hermaphrodites). 

- Abnormal bud growth. 

Stress related sex problems MIGHT produce 
hermaphrodite plants. The stress of what is 
sometimes called "early flowering" (it is not 
really early flowering, there is no such thing 
as early flowering. We will explain this in a 
moment) triggers the plant into a situation 
where it thinks that its chances of 
reproduction are slim to none. That situation 
is a condition called - 'self-pollination'. It 
does this by producing both male and female 
flowers on the same plant. The male flowers 
then pollinate the female flowers which will 
eventually produce seeds. The reason for this 
is that the plant notices that the photoperiod 
is irregular and that it should no longer be in 




213 


the vegetative cycle but in flowering. This 
shocks the plant into a last ditch effort to 
receive pollen because it feels that it has 
missed its chance to receive pollen already (in 
the wild males release their pollen just around 
the time that females begin to flower and 
sometimes even before that). 



Figure 7.3 - This is what hermies look like. 
Notice that both male pollen pods and female pistils 
are present on the plant. Picture by Rasta Linus. 







214 



Figure 7.4 - Here is another shot of the hermie 
condition. The male pods are clearly visible. Picture 

by Rasta Linus. 



215 



Figure 7.5 - These series of shots also show 
the hermie condition clearly. Picture by Tick. 



216 


Hermies cause problems because they may 
carry the hermie trait with their offspring. In 
fact, genetically the hermie will only produce 
female seeds and hermaphrodite seeds. It will 
never produce a male seed. If you have ever 
seen all female seeds been advertised by seed- 
banks then you should have the right to know 
that these seeds come from female plants which 
are stressed into producing male flowers. The 
plants then self-pollinate themselves and the 
results are female and hermaphrodite seeds. In 
a special case a female known as an XX female 
will produce more female seeds than 
hermaphrodite seeds. That is how female seeds 
are created. In general growers try to keep 
away from any hermie plants because they will 
spoil a Sinsemilla crop. Also having pollen 
floating around in your grow room from a hermie 
plant will spoil everything else including 
breeding projects. 


Abnormal bud growth is a side effect of 
this. Because the plant produces male pollen 
sacks in with female flowers you may notice 
that the bud looks different. Also the quantity 
of female bud produced is decreased because of 




217 


pollination. 

Early induced flowering is not technically 
forcing your plant to flower. If you force 
flower on one strain that has not pre-flowered 
it will flower at roughly the same time as an 
exact copy of the same strain which has been 
flowered only when the pre-flowers appear 
naturally. Force flowering simply acts by 
stressing the plant into a crisis condition. 

Get the best out of your plant and wait 
until your plant starts pre-flowering before 
switching to 12/12. 


Keep feeding and watering your plant as 
normal. Pay attention to the flowering areas as 
they begin to grow. At this stage you may want 
to switch to your flowering feeds. Soon you 
will be able to see your plant's sex. 

THE MALE/FEMALE THING or HOW TO SEX YOUR PLANTS 


You now have spent time and money on your 
plants. You have grown a small selection in the 
hope that you will get some females out of them 
in the end. If you end up with no female plants 
out of 15 seeds then send the seed-bank a 




218 


letter explaining how out of the 15 seeds 15 
where male. If you are lucky and sincere in 
your writing then the seed-bank may send you 
some free seeds or give you a discount on your 
next order. Seed-Banks or breeders are not 
responsible for male/female ratios. It simply 
is not under their control. People get 100% 
females and others get 100% males, but it is 
rare that such a thing will happen. To get 5 or 
more females in a pack of 15 is a good thing. 

Here are some pictures of male and female 
plants. 




219 



Figure 7.6 - This is a picture of a male plant. You 
can see the male pod clusters clearly. The picture is 

by the 'Chronic_Couple ' . 




220 



Figure 7 . 7 - This is a female plant by 
BigIslandBud. 








221 


Notice how the female produces little white 
hairs and the male produces little ball like 
shapes. This is the definitive male/female 
telltale factor. Do not kill away any plants 
before you see these flowers. It is the only 
time that you can really say for sure if the 
plant is male or female. 

FLOWERING 


If all things have gone well and you have 
taken good care of your plants, you will now 
enter the flowering stage of the plant's life 
cycle. You have removed and maybe killed off 
the males. You now have a number of females to 
work with. This is going to be the most 
important time you will spend taking care of 
your plant. 

The male plant produces pollen sacks which, 
when ripe, burst and scatter pollen to the 
female plants. The female plant produces white 
hairs at the internodes and top cola (head) of 
the plant during flowering. These hairs 
(pistils) begin to curl slightly and grow 
longer and thicker. The top cola should carry 
the most pistils. These pistils are sticky too 




222 


touch (do not touch them too much! they also 
contain your much wanted THC) and begin to 
cover in resin over the flowering period. The 
reason for the stickiness is that it is used by 
the female to catch falling pollen. If the 
female plant is not Pollinated she will try to 
grow more sticky areas. Hence the results of a 
sinsemilla crop.Bigger and Better Buds! 





223 



Figure 7.8 - Picture by BushyOlderGrower. 










224 


During the strict cycle of 12/12 she will 
eventually reach a peak period of flowering. 
Along with the flowering cycle the plant will 
also fill out more. More leaves, more branches 
and more flowers. Your plant will start to 
almost take the shape of a Christmas tree. The 
lower fan leaves will be stretched out to the 
max in order to receive the most light. Running 
upward in a cone shape she will get tighter 
with floral and leaf development. 

During the peak period of flowering the 
female pistils on the flowers tips will swell 
up. When the swelling takes place the pistils 
will begin to change in colour. They will 
generally change from a white to an orange tint 
to a red tint to a brown tint. All strains are 
different but in general it is a white to red 
or a white to brown colour change (It is best 
to use the breeders recommended flowering times 
for harvest guidelines though). When she does 
this you are ready to harvest her and sample 
your favourite herb. 

Each strain does have their own flowering 
times and each strain also may have a different 
colour tint when they reach a flowering peak. 

We will talk more about harvesting in 
another chapter. 




225 


Chapter 8 

ADVANCED INDOOR SOIL BASED GROW METHODS 


New ways of improving your plants yield 
have crept up over the years or so and some of 
them have become quite popular. The three most 
common new types of indoor growing are SOG, 
ScrOG and Cabinet growing. These are basically 
ways to grow seriously large top colas. 

These methods do not have to be soil based, 
one can use hydroponics instead but soil is 
generally the most widely used medium with 
these set-ups. 

The idea behind these methods is that the 
bottom branches of indoor cannabis plants do 
not catch much of the light cast from the HID 
and are not that good to smoke either because 
they are fan leaves. So why not create an 
apparatus that concentrates on the top part of 
the plant. In most cases the cola, is going to 
produce the most bud so why not try to get that 
part of the plant to grow really big. So along 
came the idea of SOG, which is also called Sea 
of Green. 




226 


SOG 


A SOG set-up can be any size but must 
maintain a certain overall shape. First of all 
you need to grow some plants normally first. 
Wait until you see flowers and then select the 
nicest female you can find. Take cuttings from 
this female mother plant and grow the cuttings 
out until they have roots. When you do take 
multiple cuttings try create as many plants as 
you can fit into your grow set-up. In SOG grows 
we are looking a 1 plant per square foot or 
even one plant per 0.10 square feet. So that 
should be a good estimate as to how many clones 
you will need. Now, we want to look at pots 
here first. What we really need are tube shaped 
pots or pots that have a longer depth than 
width. You can make these yourself or buy these 
pots in the store. All we want to do is pack in 
as many pots with plants as we can into the SOG 
grow chamber. It is just a big cluster of pots 
with clones. The clones are planted all at the 
same time. No more new plants are introduced 
into the SOG grow room. When they have reached 
your desired height (keep it small), they 
should be flowered. Because the clones have 
been taken from a mother plant, the clones will 
carry the age of the mother plant with them. 
Since we took them from a flowering mother they 
will start to flower as soon as we start 12/12. 

The final harvest result will be a full 
canopy of bud, hence the name Sea Of Green. 
Because you are using clones you only have to 
grow the clones out for the remainder of their 




227 


flowering times. This means you can have a 
large bud quantity turnover ever 2 months. 



Figure 8.1 - An example of a ScrOG by 'A Merry 

Caner". 






228 


ScrOG 


This is like a SOG (Sea of Green) grow except 
fewer plants are used in conjunction with a 
screen to fill the grow area out with heavy top 
colas, hence its name - ScrOG (Screen of 
Green) . 

This screen is simply a large wire mesh put 
between your light and the plants (Figures 8.1 
and 8.2). Again clones from a female plant are 
used like in the SOG method, but we allow at 
least 1 square foot per flowering plant in the 
ScrOG method. 

The plants are not flowered until as such 
time as they have covered the entire mesh with 
green. As the plants grow up through the wire 
mesh they are trained and worked around the 
netting to form a very even canopy. The top 
colas and side branches are all trained under 
the screen. 




229 



Figure 8.2 - Another basic ScrOG grow. Picture by 

Rattdog. 


There are many variations of the above two 
methods. They all still contain the same 
principles. SOG and ScrOG's were originally 
set-up to get the most out of poor quality 
fluorescent lights. Today's growers, since 
HID's came along, using a 600 watt HID bulb 
have literally taken these set-ups to a new 





230 


level. 

The veteran fluorescent user would line the 
roof of the shelf or the box with fluorescent 
tubes to try and get the most out of their grow 
with this method. Now with the HID lights they 
can really push their buds to the limit. Some 
people even grow top colas that are the size of 
soda bottles or large corncobs! 




231 



Figure 8.3 - This picture shows a ScrOG variation. It 
is a small ScrOG set-up for a cabinet grow. This 
picture also contains a Homemade Octagonal Vented 
Hood for 250W HPS light. Picture by Foz 



232 


SCRQG GROWING 
By REALHIGH 


RealHigh is a ScrOG lover and has been 
growing ScrOG style for some years. He has 
added a bit to the ScrOG method through his 
experience with the process. This should help 
you understand more about the ScrOG method and 
what people have learned with this new 
technique. 

This is like a SOG (Sea of Green) grow, but 
a screen is used to train the plant to grow 
horizontally creating a canopy of buds beneath 
the light. The screen is simply 2" chicken 
wire, or 2" nylon poultry fencing, or one can 
use hooks and 20 lb. fishing line to make their 
net. 

The screen is at a set height above the 
plant medium. This height varies from 8" to 24" 
depending on the size light used to grow with. 
The light should be hung by chains and 
adjustable so that one can raise it if needed. 

Clones are used again like in SOG style, 
because we do not want a hole in the canopy 
were a male was removed. This is why we use 
female clones for SOG and ScrOG grows. It does 




233 


not take as many plants for ScrOG grow as 
compared to SOG. One should allow at least 1 
square foot per flowering plant In a ScrOG 
grow. 

This method also takes anywhere from 1 to 3 
weeks longer per grow because we will be in a 
vegetative stage longer than a SOG grow. 

The plants are trained to grow horizontally 
under the screen until they are 2 weeks into 
the flowering cycle. At this point you let the 
tops grow vertically through the screen. One 
should always train the main growing tops to 
the outside of the screen. They always grow the 
tallest, and we want the tallest to be on the 
perimeter of the screen. As the tops grow 
vertically, push the large fan leaves down 
under the screen, allowing the light to get to 
all the developing bud sites. If leaf growth is 
excessive, one should first cut the finger in 
half making a shorter leaf and allowing light 
to get to the bud site. Leaving half the leaf 
on the plant still allows it to make energy for 
the plant to grow. Taking a whole fan leaf away 
in one go can stunt growth. 

In a week take off the rest of it. Some do 
not remove leaf at all, but I do it to help 
with air movement, reduce chance of mould or 




234 


fungus, and to allow light to penetrate the bud 
sites. Just remember to remove a little at a 
time if you do remove leaf. 

At this point flowers are forming and 
growing vertically creating a carpet of bud 
above the screen. Now we go below the screen 
and remove all the lateral branches and stray 
bud sites. The canopy has thickened up enough 
now that light is blocked from reaching this 
lower growth. It is only sucking away your 
plant's energy from the buds under the light. 
Remove all branches that have not made it to 
the screen and the stray bud sites. We want the 
plant to concentrate all it's grow energy on 
the developing flowers above the canopy. 

The main 3 differences between a SOG and 
ScrOG grow is the number of plants grown, the 
screen, and the slightly longer grow cycle of 
the ScrOG. Both methods can be done under the 
same light and in soil or with hydroponics. 
There are many variations of the ScrOG grow, 
but they all contain the same principles. There 
are the V-ScrOG, Stadium ScrOG, Flat ScrOG, and 
the Cylinder ScrOG grows in today's homes. I 
think you can picture what these look like. 

They work the same way but just have a 
different shape. 




235 


One of today's strains has earned a place 
in the ScrOG garden and this is C99. One will 
find a pure indica or indica dominant cross 
will produce the best in a ScrOG grow. A good 
ScrOG grow will average 2 ounces of bud per 
square foot of screen, but one can not expect 
this the first few grows, for it takes proper 
timing and the correct strain to accomplish 
this. 

ScrOG was originally designed for grow 
area's limited in height and fluorescent lights 
were used to light the grow area. Today's 
growers are using HID (High Intensity 
Discharge) lights for growing ScrOG. They have 
taken it to the next level with these lights 
and are generating great results. 

Today's grower is always trying some thing 
new to better production of their favourite 
plant. 

So there we have RealHigh explaining to us 
how he has worked with the ScrOG system. As you 
can see he has added much more to the basic 
ScrOG than we have mentioned. All this comes 
with experience, practice and experimentation. 




CABINET GROWING 


To define this is going to be no easy task 
A cabinet can be your hot press, small closet, 
an old refrigerator, a box, a press, or a 
simple cupboard will do. The grow area is 
usually small and can accommodate 1 to 4 plant 
at a time. The idea behind a cabinet grow 
(Figure 8.4) is to keep a cycle of plants 
growing at all times. There are three things a 
cabinet needs to get started, and these are: 

-The Cabinet 
-A Light 

-An air vent with fan. 

Most people simply set up their lights so 
that it is adjustable. 




237 



Figure 8.4 -A simple cabinet grow by X3nO. 


They do this by using adjustable chains or 
a spring-type cord. A large hole is made in the 
unit to allow some air to get in. Another hole 
is made to allow air to escape. A fan is placed 
in one of the holes that will extract the hot 
air which is being generated by the heat from 
the bulb. This vent and fan would be near the 
top of the cabinet near the light. Hot air 



238 


rises and that is why it is placed there up 
top. The intake hole is on opposite side of 
grow area and can have a fan in it also. This 
fan is generally moving a bit quicker than the 
extractor fan to allow a fresh supply of air to 
circulate before leaving the grow room. 

The walls are painted flat white or Mylar 
is hung for reflective purposes. The plants are 
usually placed in separate pots and go through 
their entire life cycle within the cabinet 
environment. Clones are taken from the plants 
and placed either on a second shelf in the 
cabinet or near a window in your house. Some 
people have made a small compartment in their 
cabinet for clones and germination. This can be 
any size, but is kept small because you only 
want to just keep the clones alive. This small 
compartment will probably have one or two 
fluorescent lights in it for the clones. It 
would be best to keep the compartment at the 
top of the grow chamber near the exhaust fan. 
You do not need an intake fan for these clones 
unless it is a big set-up. A simple hole in the 
side will allow the plants to breathe. After 
the harvest, these clones are put into the grow 
room and the process is repeated. It is a 
Perpetual Grow. The legal term is a Marijuana 




239 


Factory. You can harvest bud every 30 days if 
you have the right strains. Your light can be 
air-cooled in a few ways. The most common way 
is to mount a 4" dryer flange on the hood and 
link from the hood flange to the exhaust fan 
flange with a 4" dryer hose. A fan can be 
mounted on the hood also. 



Figure 8.5 - This is a picture of a typical 
cooled system that can be purchased in most 
shops that sell grow lights. 


air- 

grow 



240 



Figure 8.6 - Nice Frosty Bud by 'A Merry Caner'. 



241 


ADVANCED SET-UPS 

As you can guess all of the above grow 
methods can be shaped to suit the grow room. 

Many a cannabis cultivator have turned 
entire rooms into a ScrOG or SOG grow. Size is 
totally up to the grower. For those who are 
happy with 4 ounces of dried bud every month a 
small SOG or Cabinet grow is the way to go. For 
those who want a bigger yield to last all year 
then a large ScrOG grow may be considered. Many 
a 5-ft. x 5-ft. ScrOG grower have delivered 30 
to 50 ounces of Marijuana every 2 months. When 
conditions are at their optimum level this can 
be achieved. 

An expert's indoor grow room would look 
something like this. 14-ft. x 24-ft. area x 9- 
ft height. Several vertically suspended HPS 
lights would hang from the ceiling. The roof, 
walls, and floor would be covered in reflective 
material like flat white paint and Mylar. All 
lighting fixtures would be met at a junction 
box on the wall. Ballasts would also be 
attached to the wall. The plants would be 
placed on the ground in large container buckets 
inter spread between the lights hanging down. 
The room would also be completely light proof. 




242 


Multiple air ducts and extraction fans 
would take the hot air out and pull the fresh 
air in. An Ozone generator would be in place to 
kill the smell and cannabis odour. Other items 
may be in place such as a C02 generator, 
electrical generator, and even a light mover 
like a Light Rail III. A Light Rail is a 
horizontal light mover and there is a 'Sun 
Circle' that the lights suspend from that move 
the lights in a circular pattern. This allows 
fewer lights to be used in covering a large 
grow area like this one. 



Figure 8.7 - This is a picture of a Sun Circle 

light mover. 


That is about the bones of what a 
professional grow room would look like. 




243 


PERPETUAL GROW CYCLES 


The objective of the perpetual grow is to 
keep most of the room flowering at all times. 
This means that while your plants are flowering 
you will have an equal amount of plants in the 
vegetative growth stage. So in essence, half 
the grow is in its vegetative stage and the 
other half is in its flowering cycle. 

As with most grow rooms, the grower will 
learn to make the best use of his/her grow 
space. The room will become an intense hobby 
area and a most rewarding one too. In time the 
grower may even begin to learn more about plant 
genetics and start to develop some strains of 
their own breed and stock. Soon the grower may 
find himself or herself entering competitions 
or even producing some of the finest seeds 
available on the market. As you know seeds sell 
between $20.00 to $150.00 for 15 seeds. A 
breeder could soon find their hobby turned into 
a nice little income maker. 




244 


Chapter 9 

HYDROPONICS 


THE GROWER AND THE GROWING MEDIUM 

As the grower begins to experiment with 
soil types and mixing them they may begin to 
look at alternative growing mediums such as 
rockwool or Clay pebbles. These are mostly 
artificial grow mediums designed to contain all 
the plants mineral needs and allow air to get 
the roots to promote good growth. 


5 



Figure 9.1 - This is a picture of rockwool in various 
forms. You can see slabs and cubes in this picture. 
'Grow Dan' is a popular brand of rockwool. 






245 


In the early days of experimenting with 
artificial grow mediums inventors found that 
plants just needed a suitable material that 
holds minerals, performs some form of drainage 
and allows air to get to the roots. If they 
could invent a non-toxic medium then the plant 
would surely grow as well as it would in soil. 
During most investigations they found that the 
roots did not respond too well to the mediums, 
but that the plant was receiving nutrition in 
every aspect when the nutrients were added to 
the artificial medium by hand. To solve this 
problem the inventors looked back into the 
history of growing. They found that many 
Ancient Civilizations where growing their 
plants directly in running streams. A light 
reed or bush was used to keep the plants stems 
above the rushing water. Of course the 
inventors knew that only certain types of 
plants could be grown this way. Then someone 
had the bright idea of creating a small unit 
that held water and had the medium and plant 
set-up in such away that the medium would 
support the plant above the tank that would 
feed water to the roots once they grew out of 
the medium. 




246 



Figure 9.2 - Rockwool cubes are excellent for 

cloning. 





247 



Figure 9.3 - This is the underside of a hydroponics 
system. Notice the root masses hanging down like fine 
clear strands. Root masses can really grow long in 
hydroponics systems. This image is by Shipperke. 



248 


The method is called hydroponics and is a 
very successful way of growing marijuana if you 
are looking for large bud quantities, or bud 
all year long. 

Hydroponics is the technique of growing 
plants without soil, but rather in beds of 
sand, gravel, or artificial mediums that are 
flooded with a nutrient solution. 


Basically a simple hydroponics system 
consists of a pot, a reservoir, a grow medium, 
a pump and a set of growth nutrients. The 
system itself has a top layer and a lower 
layer. The top layer holds the grow medium and 
the bottom layer holds the water with added 
nutrients. The plant is grown in the medium 
where it will develop a stem and a set of 
roots. The roots will grow through the medium 
and down into the nutrient solution. Water and 
nutrients are pumped into the lower portion of 
the tank through a reservoir at certain timed 
intervals. The plants drink the solution down 
and thus exposes their roots to the air more. 
If this it timed correctly and the growing 
solution is maintained the plants will 
flourish! This is because the plant can devote 




249 


more of its energy into upper-body growth 
rather than putting that energy into roots 
searching for water and air. Now having said 
this, hydroponically grown plants produce 
massive root clusters and I mean a big mass of 
roots . 

One can easily pick up a 2-gallon bucket 
full of root growth from a single plant! This 
is because roots thrive in hydroponics systems. 
Hydroponics has become a fast growing trend in 
cannabis cultivation. It does require a certain 
degree of maintenance, but the results are 
sometimes incredible. On the other hand if a 
hydroponics system is not well maintained the 
whole unit may fail and kill your plants very 
quickly. This is the biggest problem that the 
hydroponics grower has to contend with. 

Hydroponics, when done correctly, can 
produce a flowering plant up to 3/4 the normal 
time that it would take with a soil grow. That 
is right! Hydroponics can grow bigger and 
better buds in 3/4 the time it takes to grow 
the same strain in soil. 




250 


HYDROPONICS SYSTEMS 

There are many hydroponics systems out 
there but here are ones that are most commonly 
used. 

- Nutrient Film Technique - NFT 

- Flood & Drain - Ebb & Flow 

- Drip Irrigation System 

- Aeroponics 

- Automatic hydroponics Pots 

- Manual hydroponics Pots 

NFT 



Figure 9.4 - This is a picture of an NFT system. 






251 


An NFT system is an all-in-one system. In 
other words the reservoir which holds the pump 
and nutrient solution is contained in the same 
system. These systems are generally very flat 
and long. There is a constant flow of nutrients 
to the roots and back to the reservoir. 



Figure 9.5 - This is a professional reservoir unit. 
It is light tight and contains perforations for pump 

attachments. 



252 


FLOOD & DRAIN - EBB & FLOW 



Figure 9.6 - This is a popular Ebb and Flow system on 

the market today. 

An Ebb and Flow is another all in one 
system that is recognized by its depth. The 
grow medium is located above the reservoir 
which pumps the nutrients and water to the 
roots at a set time and rate. This means that 
during the day the plant will go through spells 
of dryness. The nutrient solution is pumped 
into the medium and is slowly drained back into 
the reservoir again. The whole unit recycles 
the nutrient solution at timed intervals. 




253 


DRIP IRRIGATION SYSTEMS 

The Drip Irrigation System is another all 
in one system that feeds the plants 
individually. The plants are located in 
separate chambers and the nutrients are fed to 
the medium by a small dripper. The solution is 
drained through much like an Ebb/Flow system. 


AEROPONICS 



Figure 9.7- This is an example of an aeroponics 

sys t em . 






254 



Figure 9.8 - Aeroponics can be classified as a branch 
of hydroponics, but in recent years it has become 
something of a method in a field of it's own. 

These systems are generally expensive and 
are used by professional growers. The unit 
itself can be recognized straight away by its 
design. The plants are grown in a medium that 
is placed into slots along a lengthy tube. The 
tubes can run anywhere from 1 meter to 20 
meters in length. Inside the tube are nozzles 
which mist down the roots of each plant with 
grow nutrients. The reservoir, which contains 
nutrients, is kept outside of the tube in a 
tank. The nutrients are pumped from the tank to 
the nozzles and then the remaining solution 
that drips from the plants is drained into 







255 


another tank that is normally checked before 
being reused again. 



Figure 9.9 - An Aeroponics unit in use by Taffy 

Lewis. 






256 



Figure 9.10 - This is a complete aerokit with over 20 
plants. Picture by Taffy Lewis. 





257 


AUTOMATIC HYDROPONICS POTS AND MANUAL 
HYDROPONICS POTS 


Figure 9.11 






! E ^ 

' JB 

\ 

i m *] 


i 



- This is an example of an 
manual pot system. 


automatic and 


These are pots that are used for growing 
one plant at a time. In each pot a pump 
delivers the nutrients (or they are manually 
fed by hand), into the bottom of the pot until 
the nutrients reach the roots. The roots then 
suck up as much as they can until they are dry. 
Once the roots are exposed the pot is fed with 









258 


more nutrient solution again. These units are 
good for the grower who wishes to grow big 
bushy cannabis plants in a simple stand-alone 
unit. 


HYDROPONICS NUTRIENTS 


This is the most important part of your 
hydroponics set-up. Your mix and the choice of 
nutrients will depend on whether your plant 
will die, grow, grow big, or grow very very 
big. 

Nutrient solutions basically come in a 
number of different forms. It is vital to check 
that the solution you use is the best for your 
type of plant. Some solutions are for soil and 
can only be used with soil. They contain the 
wrong elements for hydroponics use. There are 
soil-based supplements/fertilizers and then 
there are hydroponics nutrients. 

Most hydroponics nutrient solutions are 
complete nutrient solutions. They provide every 
element and compound needed for proper plant 
growth. Because of this hydroponics nutrients 
are a bit steep in price. Always spend your 
money on the correct nutrients because any 
short cuts will lead to failure and kill your 




259 


plant. 

Single Packs: 


If all the nutrients are contained in a 
single pack there is a chance that the elements 
may combine and precipitate in the pack. This 
may cause the solution to become unbalanced and 
is then rendered useless to you and your 
plants. Keeping this in mind, get a complete 
nutrient solution that is contained in several 
bottles called 'Twin' or 'Triple packs'. 

One brand name called Formulex has managed 
to hold all the elements in a single pack using 
certain chemicals to prevent precipitation. 

This pack is very good for starting clones or 
seeds in a rockwool SBS tray. Formulex can be 
used in soil grows also. 




260 


KnMULEX P 

H r i i i ‘ 

'mil i i u - 



Figure 9.12 - Formulex 
Twin / Triple Packs: 



Figure 9.13 - This is an example of triple pack 


nutrients. 


For best results the hydroponics grower 
should consider a Twin or even a Triple pack. 





261 


Basically the chemicals are held in different 
packs to prevent precipitation. Optimum, Power 
Gro, Ionic, and General hydroponics Flora 
Series are the most common multi part nutrient 
solutions. The most popular one with cannabis 
cultivation is the G.H. Flora Series, a 3-part 
system, Gro, Micro, and Bloom. An experienced 
grower can adjust these nutrients to get 
optimum performance from their plants. 

These packs have instructions on the 
bottles explaining how to mix down the 
nutrients into water, and can be broken down 
and mixed weaker or stronger to the grower's 
needs. 


MONITORING RECYCLE SYSTEMS 


Depending on what set-up you are using, you 
may find that your solution goes through a 
system that uses the nutrients in the reservoir 
over and over. As the plant extracts the 
nutrients and minerals from the solution it 
will become depleted of its resources over 
time. For this reason we must understand how to 
monitor our nutrients. In today's world 
monitoring systems are a bit expensive. If you 
have a ppm reader (TDS meter. Total Dissolved 




262 


Solids) you can understand how much of your 
nutrients have been used up and how much more 
you need to add to reach the optimal nutrient 
level. All reservoirs will become unbalanced 
and need replenishing. As a general rule, an 
initial amount is used to fill the reservoir. 
As the plants use up the solution, we top up 
the reservoir to maintain the initial level. 

If you start with 10 gallons of solution 
then we need to top up to that total of 10 
gallons every few days. 



Figure 9.14 - Ppm reader (TDS meter ). 




263 


If you do not have a reader you can still 
grow a good crop, but it takes practice to get 
it right. If a cannabis hydroponics grower does 
not have a ppm reader, then they tend to 
replace the reservoir more often instead of 
topping it up. That way the grower is certain 
that the new solution will contain everything 
the plant needs. If you have a ppm reader then 
you only need to top off the reservoir as 
needed. PPM (parts per millionth) readers can 
be expensive, but over time they will help you 
save money on the cost of hydroponics 
nutrients. 


HYDROPONICS GROWING MEDIUMS 


There are many hydroponics mediums to use 
that your plant will take root in. Rockwool 
appears to be the most popular and comes in 
either slabs or cubes. These cubes vary in 
sizes from 1" to 6" cubes. The slabs can be cut 
to suite the shape of your pot or container. 

Rockwool: 


Many growers like to use the cubes for seed 
germination and for rooting cuttings. This 




264 


seems to be the easiest to use. Many growers 
claim that rockwool should be pre soaked for 24 
hrs in water with a pH level of 5.6. This is to 
stabilize the pH level of the rockwool. 


How to make up nutrient solutions: 


Always follow the very simple instructions 
on the products. All you need is a container to 
make up the nutrients in and the nutrients 
themselves. Each of the packs should have A, B, 
and C written on them. The mixture is usually 
3.5mls of A and B and C per litre of water. 

This is called a 100% strength mixture if you 
follow the guidelines as stated exactly on the 
label. 

Hydroponics pH: 


After you have mixed up your nutrient 
solution you will want to take a pH reading of 
it. If you have any problems, just like in soil 
growing, you will need to adjust your pH level. 
Now, you do not use the same method to adjust 
pH levels as described in the soil chapter. For 
hydroponics you need to buy a pH Up and pH Down 




265 


adjusting solutions. These are cheap and can be 
added to your solution to balance the pH level. 

NOTE : 

Cannabis plants in a soil systems like a pH 


of 

7 , but 

in 

hydroponics systems 

they like a pH 

of 

5.2 to 

6. 

3. You will discover 

it is easier 

to 

maintain 

a pH range and not a 

set level. 



Figure 9.15 pH up and pH down products for 

hydroponics use. 














266 


Always check your hydroponics pH level as 
often as you can. pH can slip up and down very 
quickly in hydroponics systems. 

Alga: 


Alga is part of a large group of non- 
vascular mainly aquatic cryptogams capable of 
photosynthesis. 

Always keep your container away from 
exposure to direct light, as alga will grow in 
the container if you do not. This seems to be 
something of a problem because we grow plants 
under lights and we may have a system that has 
to be sitting near the light so the plants can 
grow properly. Most hydroponics systems have 
been manufactured 'light tight' to eliminate 
this problem. If you built your own system then 
you may want to keep your solution sealed from 
the light by using thick black PVC tape to 
cover the lid and the entire reservoir. This 
will help prevent alga from growing in your 
system. 

If you do have alga growth then you need to 
clean your system out. Wash the unit and 
replace the nutrient solution with a fresh mix. 




267 


Also try to find the source of the light leak 
and patch it up. Using a thick black garbage 
bag works well to keep the light out. 

Grow and Bloom: 


Some of the double packs come in two 
different sets - Grow and Bloom. Basically the 
Grow solution is used during the plants 
vegetative stage and the Bloom is used during 
the flowering stage. The Bloom formulas contain 
more Phosphorus and Potassium and less 
Nitrogen. 

Other packs have a complete all in one 
function, but they are lacking some additional 
extras. 

Cannabis may find a lot of the nutrients 
that are mixed full strength to be too strong 
and it will burn them. It is recommended that 
when using any hydroponics formulations with 
cannabis that you do so in MODERATION for your 
first grow. Many cannabis growers have bought 
these products with anticipation of producing 
great buds only to get great plant burns 
instead. It is best to start off with 30% 
strength at first and then increase if needed. 




268 


Strengths: 


Marijuana cultivators have found that full 
strength nutrient solutions are not a good 
thing. In fact even medium strength formulas 
have the power to burn your plants. Consult the 
information on the packs, but in general 3.5 
mis of A and B and C per litre is usually 
called 100% strength. The same amount mixed 
with 2 litres of water is 50% strength. 
Marijuana can grow very well between 30% and 
50%. Never go full strength with your nutrients 
if this is your first time. Try 30% for the 
first attempt and see how your plants do. You 
will be surprised at how rich a bud content you 
will produce with this amount of nutrients. The 
most common problem associated with hydroponics 
is plant burns. I have rarely heard of someone 
under-feeding his or her plants in a hydro 
system. I have heard plenty of reports about 
overfeeding plants in hydro systems. Over time 
you will get to know your strain and what it 
likes. The better you know your strain the 
better you will be able to control your feeding 
amounts. 




269 


HARD WATER PROBLEMS 

If you have scales in your bucket or what 
looks like kettle rust then you have not been 
maintaining your pH level. Scale is caused by 
very acidic pH levels. Your local water company 
will provide you with a read out of your water. 
You can buy nutrient products to use with hard 
water. If this problem persists just drain and 
clean your reservoir and mix a new batch of 
nutrients to the correct pH level. Some use a 
Reverse Osmosis water filtering system to clean 
their tap water. Distilled water has a stable 
pH level of 7.0. 

HOW TO KNOW WHEN TO ADD MORE NUTRIENTS 

This is easy and not so easy. Beginners 
rely on a ppm meter, but a veteran grower 
learns to read the plant. The plant will tell 
you if is getting enough or too much or too 
little. It takes a few grows to learn to read 
the plant but you can do it with experience. 

The plant may have drunk all the nutrients up 
or just some of them. Some nutrients are taken 
up by the plant and stored within the plant 




270 


until it needs more. A top up can be done if 
you do not want to change the reservoir 
totally. If you do not have a PPM meter to 
calculate this accurately, simply write down 
your nutrients mix ratio from day 1. Let's say 
we used 3.5 ml of A and B and C in a 1 litre 
drum. Now the plant has drunk 1/2 a litre, now 
all you need to do is make another litre of 
3.5ml mix in another container and add 1/2 of 
it to the reservoir. This is one simple way of 
doing it, but you are left with a half litre of 
solution, so do your math and make a mixing 
chart so you can mix up different amounts as 
needed. Local grow shops will help you most of 
the time with any questions that you might have 
about their products. 

CANNABIS AND HYDROPONICS 

Growing in hydroponics is not rocket 
science. It is a simple process which can vary 
from system to system depending on what kind of 
a set-up you choose. Most of the nutrient mixes 
are explained extremely well on the packs. If 
you follow their instructions and remember that 
Cannabis only needs 30%-50% strength nutrients 
then you will do just fine. 




271 


Over the years Cannabis cultivators have 
decided to try and beat the system by building 
their own systems. There are over 100 different 
types of systems that can be made by hand at 
home. Out of these 100, 15 have proven to be 
useful for cannabis. One of the more famous 
simplest systems is DWC, Deep Water Culture, 
a.k.a "The Bubbler". This system is very cheap 
to put together and yet still provides 
excellent growth rates. There is nothing like 
it for the price. The bubbler is a rewarding 
way to grow. 




272 


THE BUBBLER 



Figure 9.16 - A picture 


of a 


Bubbler by Strawdog 


Basically the bubbler is just a bucket with 
a lid and pump. But the set-up is so 
extraordinary that it simply zings the plant 
into life. This method can grow a plant from 5 
ft. to 8 ft. (if not more), with plenty of 












273 


fresh buds as long as it maintained and managed 
well by you, the grower. 

Here is a list of what to you need to build 
the bubbler. 

The Bubble Bucket: 


(1) Get two 5-Gallon buckets with lids. (Wash 
it out with bleach) 

(2) Get a 6" Net pot. 

(3) Cut a hole in lid of bucket so the net pot 
sits in neatly all the way down. 

(4) Cut a hole in the lid about 2cm in diameter 
near the rim (the pump hose goes in here). 

(5) Use Black gaffer tape to wrap the pot so it 
is light proof. (If light gets in alga will 
develop in the water. This is not good.) Wrap 
the lid as well. 

(6) Get a fish-tank pump and air-stone. 

(7) Get your medium together - rockwool, clay 
pebbles etc. 

(8) Get the Nutrients and Mixes together. 




274 



Figure 9.17 - A close-up of the net pot and lid by 

Strawdog. 

Simply mix your nutrients together in the 
second bucket. Set the air-stone in the centre 
on the bottom of the first bucket and hang the 
air pump somewhere above the water level on the 
wall of your grow room. Use the hole in the lid 
to feed the airline through. Fill the bucket up 
with the nutrients to a level were the net pot 
just touches the solution. Turn on your air 
pump for 24 hours a day. That is it. The pump 
will send air through the tube to the air-stone 
and it is released into the water. The air 






275 


bubbles the solution causing it to splash at 
the surface wetting the roots and feeding the 
plant. Check the bubbler everyday to see how 
much your plant has drunk. Let your roots get 
air everyday by letting a root zone form. Let 
the solution level drop an inch below the net 
pot. The net pot holds the cutting in rockwool 
and the rockwool is surrounded by the clay 
pebbles. Do not constantly top up your 
reservoir, it is sometimes better to let the 
water level drop 1 gallon and then replace that 
gallon. Once a root mass has develop the plant 
will grow like no other. 



Figure 9.18 -A close-up of some early roots and 
underside of the net-pot. Picture by Strawdog. 



276 


Basically this set-up is just bubbling the 
nutrients solution with the pump. The pump 
sucks in air from the room and this air 
contains Oxygen that the roots need. As the 
unit bubbles the roots get air, nutrients and 
water. The plant loves this and thrives. 

When you want to change your mix you may 
have a spare bucket that is the same shape and 
size. Simply swap the lid over with the plant, 
root-mass and air-stone into the new bucket. 
This is a great little system that comes highly 
commended. 




277 


Chapter 10 

OUTDOOR GROWING 



Figure 10.1 


This is a good picture of an outdoor 
Sativa plant by GIYO. 





278 


Many a smoker will say that the best 
cannabis they ever smoked was outdoor cannabis. 
This says a lot about natural sunlight and the 
outdoor environment. If you live in a climate 
that is warm enough for tomatoes to grow 
outdoors then you have the climate to grow some 
good weed. As an outdoor grower you may either 
choose your own back yard or a guerrilla grow 
in a woods or field. We have discussed this in 
a previous chapter before, so we will not go 
into what the two types are here. 

When you have found a plot that suits your 
needs you can then start to prepare your plot. 
Seeds that are planted in untreated ground will 
have a low germination rate. Also you need to 
think about when to grow. The months of March 
and April are very good times to start your 
plants because when your plants are mature and 
begin to flower it should be about August to 
September which is just about the time daylight 
hours start to decrease. So in April you want 
to find your grow spot. Try to remove as many 
weeds as possible during your grow plots 
preparation and do not leave heaps of earth 
around for people to notice. Carry the earth 
away in bags if you have too. You can then 
simply sow your seeds in the ground. Do not 




279 


burry them too deep, a 1/2" to 1" is fine. You 
may choose to add some pre-made soil to the 
patch, which you have bought from the store. 
Again, find a soil with a NPK value where N is 
higher than P and K values. This is helpful 
because you will find that bag soil does not 
contain living masses or potential living 
masses such as weeds. Even though you may have 
treated your outdoor soil, it may still contain 
seeds or spores from weeds and other plants. 

You will most certainly have to weed your 
outdoor area nearly every week during the 
initial stages of the grow. 




280 



Figure 10.2 - Notice how in this picture that 
area has been cleared of major weeds. This plant 
little to no competition. Picture by Slowhand. 


the 

has 




281 


After you have sown your seeds simply 
sprinkle some water over them. That is all you 
need to do. It is that easy. You do not need to 
adjust the soil pH yet or feed the soil. What 
you have done should be fine for starting 
seedlings. 

If Mother Nature does not provide water for 
your plants then you need to draw water and 
feed your plants when they need it. 

Some outdoor growers have got some cute 
ideas. Some growers germinate their seedlings 
indoors and place them into pots. They cut away 
the base of a pot and hold the bottom in using 
a piece of cardboard and sticky tape. They then 
go to their grow area and clear away the weeds. 
They then dig small holes and place the pots 
into the hole, removing the piece of cardboard 
before doing so. They then cover the edge of 
the pot so the pot can not be seen anymore. The 
roots will grow down through the hole in the 
bottom of the pot and into the surrounding 
outdoor soil. This method has the advantage 
that the seeds have already germinated. If you 
are a really cute grower then you will consider 
cloning all females and growing these in pots 
before transplanting the pot and plant to the 




282 


hole in the ground outdoors. Amazing or what! 
You will have all female outdoor plants! 

It is also a good idea around the second 
week of vegetative growth to spray the area 
with some pesticide. 

Cannabis growing is really fun because the 
more you know, the more tricks you will invent 
by yourself to get the most out of your yields. 
Some of the best cannabis growers are very 
exotic with their grow methods. A number of 
people have even tried outdoor hydroponics to 
get their plants to grow bigger and better. 

When growing outdoors you need to keep your 
plants in good shape and free from any unwanted 
predators that may find your top cola and 
leaves to be quite tasty. We will talk about 
this in the chapter about pests. 

CARING FOR OUTDOOR PLANTS 


Weeding: 


The best way to weed is buy hand. Do not 
attempt to add any weed killer to your grow 
area unless you know more about the weed killer 
you are using and how it reacts with cannabis. 
Some weed killers say that they will protect 




283 


your plant and only kill the weeds around but 
this is not very agreeable with marijuana 
plants. If you want to test weed killers then 
it is suggested that you may create a small 
patch with one clone to see how the weed killer 
reacts with it. For now, do your weeding by 
hand. 

When you have weeded a grow area your plant 
will grow much better without having to worry 
about competition for light. Generally 
throughout the plants grow cycle you will have 
to weed the patch every week for the first 2 - 
3 weeks and then once every month until as such 
time as the competition has been left truly and 
well behind. Some grow areas may be weed free 
in March, but come June the area may not seem 
like it has been weeded at all because of the 
speed of weed growth. Whenever you visit your 
plants make sure you pull up a few weeds as it 
does help. 

If you feel that your area is very dense 
with weeds then you may consider a ground 
cover. A ground cover is basically a cover that 
is placed on the ground with holes in it that 
the marijuana plant grows up through. Covers 
can be anything from plastic bin liners to 
sheets of paper. Of course this does not look 




284 


good if you want to create a stealth grow area, 
but it does keep the weeds down. 



Figure 10.3 - Some outdoor seedlings by 
GrowerManiac. 





285 


Watering: 


This is Mother Nature's job most of the 
time. All your water should come from the 
heavens. If you find that you have a drought or 
a long warm spell during summer then you may 
wish to carry some water to your grow area. If 
you have to trek over long distances then it is 
suggested that you fill a sack with plastic 
bottles of water. 

Some garden growers use sprinkler systems 
during dry spells. This is great but again, may 
attract unwanted attention that you do not 
need. 

How much water your plant needs depends on 
how big your plant is. Some larger plants will 
require a minimum of a gallon of water per day. 
Natural loam soil will be able to hold water 
for anywhere between 4-6 weeks before 
becoming extremely dry under the sun. 

Deep pockets of water may be held below the 
surface that would not be noticed by the grower 
on the surface. The best way to judge whether 
your plants need water or not is by the way 
they look. If they are wilting badly, then they 
need water. If not, then they may be okay. In 




286 


general outdoor plants tend to wilt a small bit 
anyway during the summer months. If you want to 
really make sure that your plant has a water 
source underneath it, simply dig a small hole 
about a foot deep to the side of your plant but 
keep an eye out that you do not hit any major 
roots. Put your hand down inside the hole, does 
it feel dry? Or does it feel cool and moist? If 
it is cold and moist then the soil has stored 
some water below the surface. Your plants can 
drink this without problems. 



Figure 10.4 - Outdoor rooftop grow by Inf3cted. 





287 


Nutrients can be added to the soil during 
the grow. Switching to a P feed during the 
flowering weeks will also help. Outdoor soil 
treatment is much like indoor soil treatment 
bar the weeding. For further information on 
feeding check the indoor grow chapters. 

If you have good sunlight and enough water 
then your plants will grow throughout the full 
cycle quite well. During the end of the 
flowering season you will be ready to harvest 
your plant and reap your bounty. 




288 


Chapter 11 


THE BASICS OF PLANT CARE 


Cannabis plants will grow like most other 
plants and will eventually fill out into a 
Christmas tree shape toward the end of their 
flowering cycle. 

From its vegetative cycle to its flowering 
cycle the cannabis plant develops in three most 
noticeable sections. The top cola, the mid¬ 
section and the base. The top cola will develop 
a large amount of bud and generally is a very 
flower-full part of the plant. The mid-section 
contains bud and stems along with old and new 
leaves. This section will fill with buds that 
grow in between the nodes near the stem. 
Although these buds will generally be smaller 
in size to the main cola they should be just as 
potent. The bottom section of your plant will 
contain the large fan leaves and a small amount 
of bud. Also towards the bottom of the plant 
you will see some dead leaves that are about to 
fall away and may look yellow. 

Once a grower knows about the plant's 
different sections they can treat each section 




289 


to get the most out of their plant. The bottom 
fan leaves are generally not smoked and are 
used only to gather light for your plant. If 
your plant is growing under an artificial light 
source and you do not think that these fan 
leaves are receiving much light then you may 
think about cutting them away. This is NOT a 
good idea. Fan leaves produce sugar that is 
used in bud production. If you cut away the fan 
leaves you may cause your bud growth to stunt 
causing you to finish up with a smaller 
harvest. Leave fan leaves alone where and when 
you can. 

The only times when you should remove a fan 
leave is when it is either dying, badly burnt 
or covering a large bud mass. In a SOG or a 
ScrOG set-up you may want to remove a fan leaf 
or two because it is covering the bud mass of 
another plant. Light is the probably the most 
important factor in bud development and if the 
fan leaf is preventing light from reaching the 
bud, then you may want to remove it. 

You should remove any dead leaves from the 
bottom of your plant and throw them away. Never 
leave the dead leaves on your soil as a 
fertilizer. These dead leaves tend to attract 
unwanted pests. 




290 


Thinning: 


This really only applies to outdoor 
growers, but some indoor set-ups such as ScrOG, 
SOG and BOG may need to be thinned. 

Growers like to grow their plants in a 
uniform condition. That is - growers like all 
their plants to be the same height. That way we 
perfectly arrange our light so that it is too 
far away or close to the tops. If one plant is 
racy then we would have to adjust the light to 
suite that plant. This means that we may end up 
with light gaps like the following. 

-Distance from Plant A to light is 1 meter. 

-Distance from Plant B to light is 0.5 meters. 

-Distance from plant C to light is 8 inches. 

In this case you could imagine the plants 

in a slope shape in there grow environment. 
Obviously we are going to be wasting light, not 
to mention space on this set-up so we need to 
prevent this slope from happening. That is 
where thinning comes into play. 


The reason for the slope or curve is because 




291 


some plants might tend to be a bit racy. Some 
of the plants will try to grow quicker than 
others to try and receive more light. If this 
happens the racy plant will cause the smaller 
ones beside it to receive less light. To 
control racy plants we use a process called 
thinning. 

If you discover a few racy plants then just 
cut them down to the same level as the others 
(called pruning) or remove them all together. 
Once you have done this you will see all your 
plants growing nicely along at the same level. 

Now, do not throw away the cuttings from 
the thinning before you read the next line. You 
can clone these cuttings into new plants! 

By the time you have finished your thinning 
you will have an even grow area with some 
clones that you can use to grow more bud. 

Now the other thing to remember is that 
some people may tend to thin the other way 
round. That is - leaving the taller ones and 
remove the smaller ones. Again in Cannabis 
growing the taller plants are generally male 
and the smaller ones are female if you have 
started from seed. Do you want a garden full of 
possible males? 

During the thinning process you may want to 




292 


tackle some dead leaves or leaves that have 
some mould build up on them. Mould looks like a 
rust or fluff on the leaves and will most of 
the time spread to other parts of the plant. So 
why not cut these away too while you thin your 
grow area. 

Thinning your grow makes it look nicer and 
tidier and helps to improve your overall yield. 

Light Bending: 


Light bending occurs when a plant tries to 
grow at an angle towards the light. You may 
have seen some of the outside plants in your 
grow area bending towards the light to try and 
get their share. If your plants bend too much 
they will eventually grow towards (or even 
into) another plant. This is not good as they 
will cover other plants. Also during flowering 
the buds can get heavy and may cause your plant 
and pot to fall over. To avoid light bending 
simply switch your plants around from day to 
day. If a plant leans too much one way, then 
take it towards the middle of the pack or turn 
the plant around. It only takes a day or two 
for the plant to bend back straight again. If 
your plants can not be moved, such as in the 




293 


case of hydroponics in conjunction with a ScrOG 
grow, then you may have to tie your plants up 
so that they do not bend. 



Figure 11.1 - Here is an example of some tied up 


buds. 

If you are outdoors and you have a massive 
problem with this then you may have to cut away 
some surrounding foliage to allow more light to 
get in at your plants. If you can not do this 
then try to use a small stake and thread, such 
as bamboo, to keep your plant upright. Remember 












294 


that if your plants are bending then they are 
trying to tell you something. They need more 
direct light! 

Pruning: 


Many a marijuana cultivator have taken a 
pair of clippers to the top of their plant just 
above the last branch formation during the 3rd 
or 4th week of vegetative growth. The top is 
removed by shearing it away at the stem. This 
can also be done during the thinning stages. 
What happens next is that the main stem may 
split off in two or more directions. This 
creates a V shape at the top of your plant. The 
end results after flowering are two or more top 
colas instead of one. Now, many a cannabis 
grower will tell you that this is a great thing 
to do and sometimes it is. Two top colas 
instead of one does sound appealing but alas it 
must be said that this TOPPING method of 
pruning does not always work out the way you 
think it will. 




295 



Figure 11.2 - The results of Pruning by Chrisesq. 




296 



Figure 11.3 - Single cola picture by anonymous. 
















297 



Figure 11.4 - This is a good example of what a 
young topped plant looks like. As you can see the 
main stem has been clipped to produce 2 new stems. 

Picture by Strawdog. 

Sometimes the plant will produce two small 
top colas instead of two big ones. This really 
depends on the strain and the environment. Many 
a grower have managed to bring a plant into 
growing more than six top colas by this method. 
Each strain will have a threshold for bud 
production, which can not be improved on. Some 
plants when grown fully without pruning do not 
reach their threshold. The strain Blueberry is 




298 


a good example of this. If you grow blueberry 
without topping you will not achieve maximum 
bud production from that plant, but if you do 
top the blueberry you will. Other strains are 
not so flexible and by topping you will not 
increase bud production. The two top colas will 
simply be sharing the same volume of bud that a 
single cola would have produced on the same 
strain. So pruning for production is strain 
related and grow related. You need to find a 
strain that responds well to topping. 

It is advised that you experiment with this 
pruning method. Do this with 2 out of 10 
females with every grow you do. You will find 
in time that during this vegetative prune you 
will be able to shape your plant. Plants are 
generally pruned 3-4 weeks into their 
vegetative cycle but can be pruned sooner or 
later or more than once. Pruning during 
flowering will cause problems with bud 
production because the plant will divert its 
energy from bud production into branch and leaf 
production. The results will be a slower rate 
of Bud growth. 

Remember how we spoke about Indica plants 
being small and Sativa plants being tall. Well 




299 


if you learn to prune your plant right you can 
generate small bushy Sativa plants that grow in 
tiny spaces. Without pruning the Sativa plant 
it will probably stretch to five feet and more. 

For every stem or branch you prune, the cut 
area will develop two more branches. Look 
outside at any tree. See how the stem divides 
into branches which sub-divide into more 
branches which divide into new shoots and 
leaves. Well some marijuana plant only grow a 
main branch out from the stem and this may stay 
that way throughout its entire grow. Any 
filling out usually occurs when new leaves and 
branches develop at the nodes. Some lateral 
branches may develop new shoots but these are 
somewhat small and thin and do not support much 
bud growth. If we prune our plant we can make 
it more like the tree that we see in the 
garden. There is also a limit to how much we 
can prune. Let us follow a prune path for a 
moment. 

If we prune the stem, it will split into 
two. We can prune both these two new stems and 
end up with four stems. We may try to prune 
each of these four stems to try and create 
eight stems, but this depends on the strain and 
its branching limit which is genetically based. 




300 


We may be able to prune some of the lateral 
branches but again if the plant has reached it 
threshold it will not produce more new 
branches. All strains are different in this 
respect. 

Prune cuts are made using clippers at a 45- 
degree angle to the shoot being cut. 

Bushes: 


Some people like to keep their plants small 
and wide. Cannabis plants are great for making 
bushes with. It is a simple process. During the 
3rd week of vegetative growth prune half the 
plants branches and leave the other half. Never 
remove all the branches. Cannabis plants need 
at least 50% of the leaves to continue growing 
without stunting problems. If you go less that 
50% you may stunt your plant. Do not prune just 
one side of the plant. Prune per side to 
achieve the 50%. You may also prune the main 
top cola if you wish the cola to split into two 
or more parts. 

Wait until the 4th of 5th week of 
vegetative growth and prune the other half. 
(Only do this if the prune cuts you previously 
made have grown new branches and leaves.) 




301 


During the seventh week of vegetative 
growth you will notice that your plant has 
become more concerned with growing outwards 
than with growing upwards. 

Let us pretend that we have a plant with 8 
shoots. That means it is 4 nodes high. We 
perform our pruning as described and we end up 
with 16 shoots, but our plant is still 4 nodes 
high. Now this does not mean that we can keep 
doubling our shoots forever. Pruning just 
pushes the plant to grow all its shoots early. 
If you keep pruning up until the eighth week of 
vegetative growth with a plant that is 4 nodes 
high, the most amount of shoots you will get 
will be about 32. They do not really go beyond 
this factor much, but again this is strain 
dependent. Now each new shoot has a junction 
point or a node that it grew out from. Each 
node should produce some bud during the 
flowering stages. It is more than possible to 
create a marijuana plant that droops down over 
the sides hiding the pot. Not only that but 
different strains grow in different sizes. It 
is more than possible, with the right strain, 
to have a single plant cover an entire desk 
using this method. 




302 


Training: 


This has been discussed before in the 
indoor growing set-ups with ScrOG and SOG. 
Training is simply the art of tying down your 
plants main stem so that it grows in a 'S' 
shape pattern. Mainly this is used to prevent 
plants from reaching their natural height 
without pruning (although you can also prune 
trained plants without a problem). 

Training is done by simply attaching a 
piece of thread to the stem and bending the 
plant over. The thread is then locked down to 
either another part of the stem or a piece of 
the grow room frame. People have managed to 
grow all kinds of shaped plants using this 
method - from corkscrew shapes to complete full 
circles. Some growers even like to grow their 
plants horizontally across during the 
vegetative stage of growth. During the 
flowering cycle the light is moved above the 
plant to encourage thicker bud growth along the 
main stem. Sometimes this method does not work 
so well, but when it does the overall bud 
production can be excellent. 

If during your training, a stem should 
break, simply hold it in place again using a 




303 


stake/stick support and bind it with cheese 
cloth or a cloth bandage wrap with pours. 
Applying honey to the wound also has its 
benefits. If you rub honey into the wound the 
plant should be able to heal itself a bit 
quicker. Watch out for any new growth at the 
break area and try to trim these away should 
any be produced because they will try to break 
away the upper part of the stem, effectively 
TOPPING your plant. 



Figure 11.5 - Picture of a Stem Break by 

Slowhand. 



304 


Increasing Yield: 


The yield is the amount of smokables that 
your plant will produce at the end of its grow. 
Now at this stage you should have a fair idea 
of the following. 

The history of Cannabis, how it is used, 
different species and strains, THC, types of 
seeds and where to get them. The life cycle of 
the marijuana plant, how to germinate seeds, 
propagation, transplanting, male/female sexing, 
basic indoor/outdoor/guerrilla growing, 
security. Lights, light spectrum, HID, Lumens, 
soil types pH, soil nutrients, pots, watering, 
environmental control, soil flushing. Air, 
12/12, flowering, SOG, ScrOG, Cabinet growing, 
hydroponics, hydroponics nutrients, the 
bubbler, outdoor growing and plant care. 

With this amount of information you should 
be armed to the teeth and ready to tackle any 
ideas about where you want to grow, how much 
you want to grow and what you need. So the 
question may still be in your mind - "Can I 
actually grow marijuana?" 

Many people can grow it without a problem. 




305 


How many people can grow good thick potent bud? 
Now that is the question! 

You see this is what Marijuana is about. 

How much you know and the more you know the 
better the results will be. This hobby is so 
interesting that it is more addictive than the 
substance produced at the end of the day 
(marijuana has no physical additive properties 
but growing it is so rewarding that you may 
become addicted to growing!). I know plenty of 
growers who gave up smoking pot and yet 
continue to sit at home and develop new 
strains. It is a very addictive hobby. 

The more you grow the more you will learn 
about what your plant needs. The two most 
fundamental factors in high yield growth are - 
Strains (good genetics) and Light. 

Optimal light along with good strains will 
lead to great yields and bud plentiful plants. 
Of course high yields may not mean highly 
potent bud. Potency depends on the strain and 
how your plant is grown, remember. 

Many a grower have found that some of the 
grow bloomers and advanced feeding products 
actually produce greater amounts of bud but 
reduce the potency and produce a different 
taste. To understand which feeding products are 




306 


better to use than others requires a degree of 
experimentation on your part, but 
experimentation is what growing is all about. 
To discover new methods of growing the 
marijuana cultivator MUST experiment and 
through FAILURE learn MORE! 

Cloning: 


Cloning is a simple method of replicating 
your plants. In most cases a clone is taken 
from a mother plant and grown out into a whole 
new plant. The clone will contain the exact 
same genetic code as its mother plant. 



Figure 11.6 - Picture of some clones in soil by 


Slowhand. 













307 



Figure 11.7 - Picture of some clones in a 
hydroponics starter kit by Mia Stoner. 

In a selection of 30 seeds you may find a 
nice mother plant that you wish to keep. You 
can keep here genetic profile indefinitely by 
cloning her. 
















308 



Figure 11.8 - Picture of a clone that has just 
been cut from a mother plant by Slowhand . 


Any cannabis plant can be cloned once it 
has been grown to a certain height. The best 
place to take a cutting for cloning is above a 
node which has at least 2 nodes above it. The 
smallest cuttings on average are 3" in length. 

Once the cutting has been taken it is 
placed in the growing medium and should form 
new roots over the next week to three weeks 
depending. 

Cloning straight to soil has a low success 






309 


rate. Leaving clones in water also has a low 
success rate. The best medium for cloning is 
rockwool cubes. 

Not only that but in order to increase your 
success rates with cloning you may wish to 
purchase some rooting solutions such as Clonex 
($3) which can be bought from most grow shops. 



Figure 11.9 - Picture of homemade clone chamber 

by Tick. 


Make sure that you use a clean instrument 
and even better a sterile instrument when you 
make your cut. Take the cutting and dip the cut 
area into the rooting solution before placing 
it in the rockwool cube hole. Clones do not 



310 


need much light to root. Try to avoid using the 
bigger grow bulbs for cloning. A simple window 
with some outdoor light is all that you will 
need for that clone to root. Many people use 
Fluro lights for clones. 





311 



Figures 11.10 and 11.11 - Clones can be kept in 
small places, by Tick. 

When the clone takes root in the rockwool 
you will see the roots jut out from the sides 
of the cube. When this happens the clone is 
best transferred to its new grow medium, which 
can be soil, hydroponics or aeroponics. 

This is the most successful way of 
producing clones on the market today. You may 
even live in a country where the trade of 
cannabis clones is legal. The great thing about 
cloning is that you can create 100's of female 
plants from one single female. 






312 


Here is another method of cloning called 
Air Layering written by Strawdog. 


How to air-layer a clone. 

ITEMS NEEDED: 

PLANT! 

Match sticks or toothpick 
Tape 

Razor blade 

Rooting hormone (Clonex) 

Tweezers 
Plastic wrap 
Scissors 

(1) Sterilize all your cutting tools before 
using them. 

(2) Find a branch that is at least 1/8 inch 
thick with a minimum of two nodes. 

(3) Use the Razor Blade to split the branch 
vertically / lengthwise. 

(4) Use tweezers to open the slit. Do not break 
the branch totally. 

(5) Get 'clonex' and apply it to the open 
wound. Tape a match stick parallel to the stem 
for support. 

(6) Pack the open wound carefully with any grow 
medium, or use a rockwool cube to cover the 
area (just split the cube down one side and 
slide over the branch). 

(7) Wrap the area with the small plastic bag. 
The effect of this should be a funnel shaped 
plastic wrap enclosure. 




313 


(8) Pack the bag with grow medium before 
closing with tape. 

(9) Use a pin to create holes around bag. This 
will allow soil/medium to receive air. 

(10) Use an eyedropper to keep the soil wet. Do 
this everyday. After 2 weeks your cutting will 
have developed roots and you can cut away the 
branch below the roots. Now you have a clone 
with roots ready for growth. You can choose to 
remove the plastic bag if you feel that it is 
too tight to allow all the roots to pass 
through it. 




314 


Chapter 12 


PREDATORS AND PESTS 


Predators and pests will always be a 
problem. Here are some Predators and Pests that 
you may encounter during your grow. Along with 
their names we have also explained how to get 
rid of the unwanted pest. 

Also it must be said that a cat for a 
garden grow is the #1 defence system against 
most small predators, but an indoor cat will 
bring unwanted pests into the house! You can 
not have the best of both worlds. Cats also 
like to play with indoor plant so be very 
careful with your plants and pets! 

!!ATTENTION!! 

!!READ THIS!! 

Only use repellents and pesticides that are 
clearly marked for FOOD PRODUCTS USE on the 
label. If it is NOT FOR FOOD PRODUCT USE then 
DO NOT USE IT WITH YOUR PLANTS!!! You are going 
to be smoking your plants later. You do not 
want to end up in a hospital because of smoking 
poisoned bud. If it is safe for FOOD PRODUCT 




315 


USE then it will be safe to smoke. Read the 
products instructions clearly and carefully. Do 
not take short cuts. Do exactly as it says on 

the label. 

WOODCHUCKS 



Figure 11.1 - Woodchuck. 


Woodchucks will nibble your stems and 
collapse the plant. The way to solve this is by 
using predator urine (Also see Deer) or by 
building a very small mesh fence around the 
bottom of your outdoor plants. This will keep 
the chucks from eating your stems and branches. 
Use more than one rap of mesh and make sure 
that you keep it tight. Also planting Marigolds 
near your grow will also help keep the chucks 
away. 





316 


POWDER BUGS 

Like to lay their eggs in your bud and 
stem. They can reduce your plant to nothing in 
weeks. You need a pyrethrum-based insecticide 
to keep them away. Ask your local grow shop for 
information on this product. It will also help 
keep away other insects such as mites. 

RABBITS 



Figure 11.2 - Rabbit 


Rabbits can reduce a crop to nothing in a 
couple of days and will continue to feed from 
the same patch until they are stopped or the 
patch is destroyed. For more details See 
Woodchucks. 






317 


GROUNDHOG 



Figure 11.3 - Groundhog. 


(Also see Woodchucks.) Dry chlorine helps 
keep Groundhogs away from your plants. Find any 
Groundhog holes near your grow area and apply 
the dry chlorine around the hole. 

WILT FUNGUS 


Fusarium Oxysprum is rare, but still a 
problem is some parts of the world. This fungus 
wilts your plants and will eventually kill 
them. You actually need to get a fungicide from 
your grow shop. If they don't have it, then you 
need to order it over the Internet. 






318 


DEER 



Deer are so very curious that even electric 
fences will not stop them over time. In order 
to solve deer problems you need to get hold of 
predator urine from hunting shops. Find out 
which urine works best with deer to keep them 
away. However find predator urine which does 
not attract plant-eating animals. Simply spray 
the urine on your patch and this will help keep 
the deer away. 





319 


LEAF HOPPER 



Figure 11.5 - Grasshopper 
Harmless unless in large numbers. (Also see 

Powder Bugs). 

CUTWORMS r CATERPILLARS AND LARVAE 



Figure 11.6 - Caterpillar 


The only sure way to get rid of cutworms is 






320 


to use a cutworm repellent. Try to find a 
product that works on cutworms and cutworms 
only. All of these cutworm products work very 
well and can be bought in most grow shops. 

WHITEFLY 



Figure 11.7 - Whitefly 


Deadly. Can reduce your plant to trash in 
days. Safer's soap helps to kill Whitefly. This 
can be bought in most grow shops. (Also see 
Powder Bugs). 




321 


SLUGS AND SNAILS 



Figure 11.8 - Snail 


Make a circle of table salt about 4 feet 
away from base of your plant. Then make another 
circle a foot in from that. Salt is deadly to 
snails and slugs and will keep them out. 

MITES 



Figure 11.9 - Mites 








322 


Deadly. Can reduce your plant to trash is 2 
- 3 days. (See Powder Bugs). 

GNATS 


See Powder Bugs. 


TERMITES 

They don't like water. If you over water 
the soil around your plant they will leave. 
(See Powder Bugs). 


ANTS 



Will make a home out of your grow for their 
nests. (See Powder Bugs). They are also a sign 
of Aphids - ants farm aphids!!! Ants can be 









323 


removed using Boric Acid, or any popular 
'colony killer' pesticide. 

APHIDS 



Figure 11.11 - Aphids, picture by Vic High. 


See Powder Bugs. 










324 


SCALE 


See powder Bugs 


MEALY BUGS 


See powder Bugs. 


CLEANING THE GROW ROOM 

It does happen that sometimes the bugs win. 
No matter how much you might spray them or try 
to kill them, they keep coming back to your 
grow room. To solve this you will have to 
create a clean room, which means a total and 
complete cull of your harvest. 

First set-up another grow room of smaller 
size. Enough to support some cuttings and 
clones. Take cuttings from what plants you have 
and move the cuttings to that room. You will 
use the cuttings again eventually in your clean 
grow room if you want to continue those 
strains. 

Next up take all the grow equipment, bar 
electrical equipment, to the bathroom. Clean 




325 


down the entire equipment with bleach. Fill a 
tub with water and bleach and let the grow 
equipment rest there for a day. 

Back to the grow room. First start with the 
walls. Clean the walls down with bleach if you 
can. You will maybe have to paint them again 
after. Do the corners, up high and clean out 
any holes, extraction holes, fittings, pipes, 
etc. Then clean around the rim of the room. If 
your floor can be lifted up, then you can also 
do this to get in at the corners a bit better. 

After this cleaning has been done you can 
consider smoking the room. Various pest killing 
smoke bombs can be bought in most grow stores. 
Follow the instructions carefully and smoke 
bomb the room. This will guarantee the demise 
of any bugs, eggs or larvae but remember eggs 
are usually safe from these sprays, that is why 
they recommend a reapplication 7-10 days after 
initial treatment- MAKE SURE TO READ THE 
LABELS!!!!! 

Once this is done, clean the room again 
like you did the first time. Now you should 
have a clean room, free off pests. Repeat the 
process if needed. The more you clean it, the 
better it will be. 

Electrical items should be dusted down 





326 


before returning them to the grow room. Dry 
down your other grow equipment which was 
bleached and return this to the grow room. 

Your cuttings need to be checked for bugs. 
Also you do not move the cuttings back to the 
grow room until you have taken cuttings from 
these cuttings. Grow the cuttings out for a 
week or two and check them everyday for bugs. 

If you find any then you may have to use a 
pesticide on the cuttings. When you are sure 
that your cutting are clean, take new cuttings 
and place them in new soil and clean pots. Take 
these to your grow room and watch their 
progress and look out for any signs of pests 
and bugs. 

If you have done this correctly then you 
should have eliminated all signs of pest 
infestation in your grow room. 

Mites and other small pests can lay their 
eggs in cuttings and these can be missed when 
you look for pests because they are not 
obvious. The pesticides should have killed 
them, but some pests like the powder bugs lay 
their eggs inside the stems and seem to always 
come back. If you can’t get rid of bugs like 
this then you may have to toss your genetics 
away and get new ones. For breeders this can be 




327 


a difficult task. A long term project can be 
terminated by a few bugs wreaking havoc in the 
grow room. Breeders should pay strict attention 
to keeping their grow rooms clean at all times. 
And remember - Never take anything that has 
been outside into your grow room. 




328 


Chapter 13 


■PROBLEM SOLVER! 


Got a problem that you need to identify? If 
common sense does not solve it then it sounds 
like you have a feeding problem and want to 
know how to sort it out. Well this is what this 
chapter is all about. 

PLANT NUTRIENT / CHEMICAL PROBLEMS 
AND HOW TO SOLVE THEM. 


Before we begin we should tell you what a 
chemical burn is. A chemical burn is what the 
plant suffers because of over-feeding. A 
chemical burn can be compared to a half-smoked 
joint. At the tip of the joint you have this 
shrivelled grey ash, in the middle you have the 
burn creeping towards new paper which leaves a 
pattern behind it, and then you have the part 
you have not smoked yet. A plant burn looks 
like this almost. The plant sucks up the water 
and the food. It distributes these elements to 
the leaves at the bottom first and then works 
it way up the plant. This process takes days to 
work as you know FROM WATERING and WHEN TO 
WATER! The damage starts at the tips of the 
leaf and slowly moves to the centre of the 
leaf, leaving behind it some crispy matter that 




329 


flakes away between your fingers. This is what 
a chemical burn looks like. A nutrient problem 
does not look burnt. A nutrient problem looks 
like a cell collapse with discoloration. The 
part may wither and die, but it should not look 
burnt. That is major difference between a 
chemical burn and a nutrient problem. In time 
you should be able to tell the difference for 
yourself. 

Also check your pH. If your pH is not 
right, then solve the pH problem before you go 
and do anything else. 


A) Look at your problem and quickly search for 
any bugs. When you have completed this search, 
eliminate any bug problems by using the advice 
in the bug chapter. Also note the type of 
attack to make sure that it is not a bug 
problem AND is a nutrient problem, which can 
happen. Do your leaves look sucked and dry? Do 
you have any black dots on them like bugs? Try 
to tell the difference between a bug attack and 
a nutrient problem. Nutrient problems damage 
the plant on a somewhat consistent level. Bug 
attacks are less consistent in the damaged 
generated. They leave damaged patches 
everywhere on your plant. 

If the problem seems to affects only the 
lower portion of your plant and or a bit of the 
middle then read B). If it is only effects the 
top of your plant and the tips then you should 
go to J). If the plant is covered with the 
problem then go to F). 


B) If your plant is in vegetative growth and 




330 


the leaves are going very yellow, then you need 
more Nitrogen. If your plant is in flowering 
and you have stunted growth, yellow leaves and 
it looks to be dying then you need more 
Nitrogen. If your plant is in flowering and 
does not look like it is dying but looks red or 
dark green/yellow then you need to treat it 
with more P, which is Phosphorus. If these do 
not help then go to C. 

C) If your plant has leaves that are curling 
up, twisting and are going yellow then check to 
see if your light is burning them or if the 
grow chamber has enough air circulation. If 
this is fine then you need to consider adding 
more Mg which is Magnesium to your plants. 

Epsom salts are good - 1/4 - 1/3 table spoon of 
Epsom salts to 3 gallons of water is fine. If 
you still have a problem go to D). 

D) If the tips of the leaves turn brown and 
curl slightly then you are looking at a K 
problem which is Potassium problem. If not, 
move onto E. 

E) Does your plant look wilted? Maybe you over¬ 
watered? If not, go to F. 

F) The veins are green, but the leaves are 
yellow. This is an Iron problem, Fe. If not, 
move on to G:) 

G) Leaves are not twisted but are yellow at the 
base. The tips are fine. This is a Manganese 
problem, which is (Mn). If not, move on to H). 




331 


H) Still haven't solved it? Then flush your 
soil and find another type of plant food that 
has all of these. N, P, K, Ca, Mg and S. Get 
Epsom Salts and get a small canister of 
micronutrient. Iron, boron, chlorine, 
manganese, copper, zinc, and molybdenum. Try 
using a nutrient mixture that we have already 
mentioned before in the indoor feeding section. 
If this doesn't solve your problem, then maybe 
you have one of the following: 

POT BOUND (ROOT BOUND) 

Your plant has outgrown the pot. The entire 
root mass would have grown to its maximum 
capacity. This causes stress and a variety of 
problems. The only cure for this is a bigger 
pot. 


NUTRIENT LOCKOUT 

Well...what can we say causes this..Hmm 
there are a number of things. If you followed 
H) right then you should not have this but we 
will explain it anyway. Lockout occurs when the 
plant can not get access to a nutrient or a 
group of nutrients. This could be caused by the 
absence of nutrients (a deficiency) or by a 
chemical reaction in the medium/solution that 
causes a toxic substance to block the roots, or 
causes a chemical reaction that creates another 
substance that changes the chemical properties 
of the other nutrients. As you can see this is 
really a very open subject matter. pH problems 




332 


can lockout nutrients, your soil type can 
lockout nutrients, your water can even lockout 
nutrients. But these lockout causes are rare 
and more than likely something other than what 
cannabis needs has been added to the solution 
causing this reaction. When in doubt, 
transplant into fresh soil or a fresh 
hydroponics unit, depending on your grow 
method. 


BAD GENETIC. 

Yep, there is a lot of garbage out in the 
market. Crap genetics do exist and people still 
buy them. The genetics may have mutations, 
warping, flowering problems, a weakness in them 
or poor germination rates that will sometimes 
cause nutrient symptoms to appear even though 
your nutrient problem does not exist. The only 
solution is to get some new genetics. 




333 


Chapter 14 


HARVESTING AND CURING YOUR BUD 


Harvesting is the act of reaping your 
rewards and is without a doubt the most fun you 
will have with your garden. First of all you 
should know that harvesting smells. It stinks 
up the place really quickly, so keep this in 
mind. Now you will have followed the guidelines 
that the breeder set forth with his or her 
seeds about the flowering times. At the end of 
the flowering time examine your bud. Keep what 
you see in mind because now you will be able to 
judge other plants to know if they are finished 
or not. You do not really need to know the 
breeder's flowering time if you have been able 
to understand and identify a bud that has 
reached maturity. Here are some things that 
help identify when to harvest. Some of these 
things do not appear on every strain though. 

- 50% to 70% of the pistils change colour. 

- Your plant stops producing crystals. 

- Your plant stops producing resin. 

- The fan leaves and lower leaves have turned 




334 


yellow and are starting to drop off. 

- The smell has reached a peak. 

- Bud mass has not increased in the past few 
days . 

These are good indicators that your plant 
is now ready for harvest. There is only one 
sure way to harvest your plant and anything 
else is pretty much a variation of it. Also we 
must add that harvesting an Indica plant and a 
Sativa plant is slightly different. 

INDICA HARVEST 

Your 1 foot - 4 foot plant should he hacked 
at the base. The plant should then be hung 
upside down in a cool room, with no light and 
fresh air. Take a pair of clippers out and 
remove as much of the fan leaves as possible. 
Then remove the secondary leaves and put these 
into a separate pile. Last but not least gather 
some trim from the bud. "Trim" is the small 
leaves that are covered in resin. Now you have 
4 different qualities of weed to choose from. 
The fan leaf will only be an okay smoke, the 
middle leaves a little better and the trim will 
be very good. The BUD is the PRIME stuff though 




335 


and this will give you your best quality high! 

Leave the plant like this until a branch 
can break easily between your fingers. When it 
does you are ready to cure the Bud. 

SATIVA HARVEST 

This is much like the indica except the 
harvest itself may be quite labour intensive. 
Outdoor growers like to grow Sativa plants 
which sometimes grow up as far as 12 feet 
carrying over 20 oz of bud sometimes. These 
plants are not harvested easily. You need a 
canvas spread or another medium that you can 
use to carry the bud in. The plant should be 
chopped at the base and spread out on the 
canvas. The canvas is then rolled up and tied 
down tight for transport. Obviously if you have 
more than one plant then you might need more 
than one canvas sheet. 

The plant should then be hung upside down 
in a cool room, with no light and fresh air. 
Because of the plants size and bushiness you 
may have to cut the branches and hang these up 
separately. Take a pair of clippers out and 
remove leaves and trim as suggested in the 
Indica Harvest section. 




336 


It must be pointed out here that light degrades 
THC quantities. Your room does not have to be 
as light- proof as your grow room does during 
12/12. Just don't expose your harvest to any 
direct light. 

FAN LEAVES, LEAVES AND TRIM 


These are cured by leaving them dry on a 
flat surface, away from direct light and with 
plenty of fresh air. The leaves will dry up 
after 3 weeks and are easily smokable at that 
stage. Test them out to see what you liked and 
what you did not like. Another thing you could 
do with the trim is to make some hash from it. 
We will talk about this in another chapter. Do 
not try to speed up your drying process with 
ovens or microwaves or heat. Let them dry out 
normally and you will cure yourself a much 
better smoke from the leaves. 

CURING 


As soon as the branches are brittle you 
should consider canning your bud. Canning is a 
great way to get the most from your bud. Find a 




337 


can with a removable lid. The more cans you 
have the better. Using a pair of scissors, clip 
your bud from the branch and put it into the 
can. The branches and stem are not much good to 
you. They do contain THC, but only in small 
quantities. Most stem and branches go in the 
bin. 

Now take the can and place it a room or 
cupboard that is dark. Everyday open the lid 
for a few hours (6 hours is good) and then 
close the lid again. Also shake the bud around 
a bit every couple of days. This is the most 
common curing technique out there and it does 
do its job well. Bud that is cured well smokes 
the best! I would give the canning process 
between 3-4 weeks before you should really 
sample your goods. 8 weeks old bud can smoke 

extremely well and year old bud is vintage 
stuff but can loose potency. Fresh bud (8 weeks 
canned curing) is the pinnacle point of cured 
bud. After that some of the THC cannabinoids 
change composition and become different 
cannabinoid compounds. Fresh bud is far better 
than aged bud. You may find other curing 
processes out there, but canning does work 
wonders and is cheap to do. 




338 




339 


Chapter 15 

BREEDING 


Before we begin breeding we will keep it 
simple for those who want to learn how to 
perform simple breeding procedures and then we 
will make it a bit more advanced. 

Let's go the simple route first. We may 
want to produce seeds from our crop to continue 
a strain that we purchased or obtained. By 
breeding two plants we can produce seeds. You 
are breeding to continue a strain here but you 
will not completely replicate the plants again 
unless they are IBL (To be explained later), 
but you will generate seeds that contain most 
of the parents' features but maybe not all. 

Some of your offspring should be like the 
parents but other offspring will show different 
traits such as potency, colour and taste. 

MAKING SEEDS 


How easy is it to make seeds? Well it is 
easy if you have healthy plants and a stable¬ 
growing environment. When your male plants 




340 


burst their pollen in your grow room they will 
pollinate the female flowers. At the end of 
flowering the bud will contain seeds. The seeds 
should be darkish in colour. If they are white, 
then they are not viable and you harvested them 
too early. Wait until the end of flowering to 
get your seeds. Your seeds will be in with the 
bud. It takes quite a bit of time to sort them 
out from the bud. If you want to use the seeds 
in more than 2 years time store them in a 
freezer. Before that time storing them in a 
small film canister will work well enough. 

POLLEN 

Film canisters are a great place to store 
pollen in. You can save pollen in a canister 
for the next harvest. Pollen can be stored in 
the freezer for around 18 months. The odds of 
having pollen keep though are slim. Pollen is 
best used up to 6 months. The pollen can be 
extracted from the male flower as soon as the 
flowers are ready to open. You will see the 
male flower open out from its pod. It is best 
to gather pollen after it falls from the pod 
onto the leaves. Simply shake the pollen onto 
the female flowers to pollinate them. 




341 


SIMPLE BREEDING 

Want to breed your plants to make more 
seeds? Well this depends on what you want to 
do. Do you want to create a new strain? Then 
move onto the basics of genetics section. Do 
you want to create some seeds that are similar 
to the parents or do you want to create a cross 
of two plants to create a Simple Hybrid strain? 
Then read on. 

HOW TO CONTINUE A STRAIN THROUGH SEEDS 

So you bought $120 Silver Haze seeds and 
you want to make more seeds without any 
interference from another strain? That is easy. 
Just make sure that the male plants and the 
female plants are together from only the same 
strain batch. Do not introduce another strain 
into the pack. If you only have Silver Haze in 
your grow room, then all you need are some 
males and females. By letting the males 
pollinate the females you will get Silver Haze 
seeds. But you will loose some of the features 
that the original parent plants had in the 
selection of offspring, unless the strain you 
got was an IBL. 




342 


HOW TO MAKE A SIMPLE HYBRID 


It is easy, just take a male plant from one 
strain and a female from the other. Say Big Bud 
and Skunk. The result will be BIG BUD X Skunk, 
but there will be differences in the pack. Some 
of the plants will lean more in the BIG BUD 
direction and some in the Skunk direction. Some 
variations that where not present in the 
parents may also appear (if the parents where 
not both IBL). If you want to concentrate on 
creating more seeds so that they ONLY go in one 
direction (creating uniform plants) then you 
need to read more in this chapter. 

AN INTRODUCTION INTO BASIC GENETICS 

Genetics are somewhat difficult to 
understand at first so it is best if we give 
you a grounding in some of the breeding 
concepts mentioned in this chapter. 

We will start by first explaining what a 
couple of words mean. These words will appear 
throughout this chapter so it is best to define 
them at this point. 




343 


Genes : 


Each of the units of heredity which are 
transmitted from parent to offspring in 
gametes, usually as part of a chromosome, and 
control or determine a single characteristic in 
the offspring . 

[There are genes responsible for each feature 
of your plant to be inherited, for leaf colour, 
stem structure, texture, smell, potency, etc.] 

Alleles: 


Any of a number of alternative forms of one 
gene. 

[For example the Gene for purple bud colour may 
have 2 forms, one for purple and one for dark 
red. ] 

Homozygous: 


An individual that has identical alleles at one 
or more genetic loci r which is not a 
heterozygote and so breeds true. 

[Your plant is to be said homozygous for one 
feature when it carries in its responsible gene 
pair the same gene twice, which means both 
genes of the gene pair are equal.] 




344 


Heterozygous: 


An individual having different alleles at one 
or more genetic loci. 

[Your plant is to be said heterozygous for one 
feature when the genes of the responsible gene 
pair are unequal.] 

Phenotype: 


An organism distinguishable from others by 
observable features. 

[How your plant looks is the phenotype. It is 
the summary of all the features you can see on 
the outside of your plant. It can also be smell 
and taste.] 

Genotype: 


The genetic constitution of an individual, esp. 
as distinguished from the phenotype; the whole 
of the genes in an individual or group. 

[How your plant looks like inside, which 
features it can possibly inherit - you can’t 
see those - is called the genotype. It is the 
summary of all genetic information which your 
plant carries and can inherit to its 
off spring.] 




345 


Dominant: 


Of a gene or allele: expressed even when 
Inherited from only one parent. Of a hereditary 
trait: controlled by such a gene; appearing in 
an individual to the exclusion of its allelic 
counterpart, when alleles for both are present. 
[A gene is said to be dominant when its effect 
can be seen in the phenotype of your plant. 

Only one dominant allele in the gene pair must 
be present to be seen in the phenotype of your 
plant] . 

Recessive: 


Of a gene, allele, or hereditary trait: 
perceptibly expressed only in homozygotes, 
being masked in heterozygotes by a dominant 
allele or trait. 

[A gene is called recessive when its effect can 
not be seen in the phenotype of your plant, 
when only one allelle is present. The same 
allelle must be present twice in the gene pair 
if you can see its expression in the phenotype 
of your plant.] 

Locus: 


A position on a chromosome at which a 
particular gene is located. 




346 


Chromosome: 


A threadlike structure of nucleic acids and 
protein which carries a set of linked genes and 
occurs singly in prokaryotes and in 
characteristic numbers, usu. paired, in the 
cell nuclei of higher organisms. 


Gene Pairs 


All of life is made up of a pattern of 
genes. This pattern is similar to the two sides 
the zip on your jacket. One side is from the 
mother, the other is from the father. Each 
"gene locus", a particular space on that chain, 
controls one bit of information about the 
eventual appearance of the plant. 

Each gene locus contains 2 genes, one from 
the mother, one from the father. A pair of 
letters such as BB, Bb, Pp, pp, etc generally 
notates these. Capital refers to dominant genes 
while lower case refers to recessive. B can Big 
bud while b can be smaller bud. This is just an 
example. The letters refer to a human beings 
imaginary reference for what a specific gene 
locus controls. Any letter can be assigned to 
it. 




347 


Dominant and Recessive 


Individual genes within a locus are said to 
be either dominant or recessive. This is noted 
by a capital letter for a dominant gene and a 
lower case letter for a recessive gene. 

Dominant genes have a stronger effect and if 
only one is present, will win over the 
recessive gene in that locus. 

For example the B gene means the plant will 
produce big bud, while the b gene means the 
plant will produce small bud. Since B is 
dominant a plant with a Bb genotype will 
produce Big Bud. The B is dominant over the b. 
In order for a recessive gene to have an 
effect, both genes must be recessive, so BB is 
Big Bud, and Bb is Big Bud, but bb will be 
small bud. 


Modifying Genes. 


By breeding we can determine.. Let's say... 
what the colour of the plant's bud will be, or 
more importantly, what colour the offspring of 
two plants is going to look like. The final 
appearance however will be the result of more 
than one gene locus. Plants may have several 
colour genes for different parts of the plant. 
A plant's genetic structure is quite complex. 




348 


Partial Dominance 


Now that we have explained the basics of 
dominant and recessive, you can move on to the 
next step. 

Some gene loci in plants have more than two 
possibilities. These are sometimes referred to 
as 'partially dominant genes' and are usually 
given some type of secondary marker such as B' 
or B" . 

They work just like dominant and recessives 
except that there are more than two options. If 
a gene is dominant over another gene, it will 
win. Just like a dominant will win a recessive. 


Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium 


Introduction: 


An understanding of breeding concepts 
requires a basic understanding of Hardy- 
Weinberg' s Equilibrium. Breeding depends upon 
the knowledge of population genetics. To 
understand the value of the H/W Equilibrium, 
you may have to ask yourself a question like 
this before. 

If certain diseases are a dominant trait, 
then why haven't large sections of the 




349 


population got this disease? 

The same question applies to cannabis 
breeding. If purple bud colour is a dominant 
trait then how come my offspring from the 
purple bud strain do not have purple buds? Or, 

I have been selecting Indica mothers and cross 
breeding them with mostly Indica male plants 
but I have some sativa leaves. Why does this 
happen? Hardy-Weinberg's Equilibrium will help 
you to understand these questions and there 
answers. 

Okay, first of all these questions reflect 
a very common misconception. That misconception 
is that the dominant allele of a trait will 
always have the highest frequency in a 
population and the recessive allele will always 
have the lowest frequency. 

There is no logic behind the idea that a 
dominant trait should show a tendency to spread 
over a whole population. Also there is no logic 
behind the idea that a recessive trait should 
die out. 

Gene frequencies can be in high ratios or 
low ratios no matter how the allele is 
expressed. The allele can also change, 
depending on certain conditions. It is the 
changes in gene frequencies over time that 
result in different plant characteristics. 

Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium will show us 




350 


whether or not gene frequencies have changed in 
a population. 

A population is a group of individuals of 
the same strain or species, [such as cannabis 
Indica or cannabis sativa (species), or Skunk#l 
and Master Kush (strains of a species)], in a 
given area whose members can interbreed with 
one another. This means that they share a 
common group of genes. This common group of 
genes is known as the GENE POOL. 

Each gene pool contains all the alleles for 
all the traits of all the population. 

For a step in evolution to occur some of 
the gene frequencies must change. That is why 
we have different types of cannabis plants. 

The gene frequency of an allele refers to 
the number of times an allele for a particular 
trait occurs compared to the total number of 
alleles for that trait. 


Gene frequency is calculated as follows. 

The number of a specific type of allele, 
divided by, The Total number of alleles in the 

gene pool. 

The Hardy and Weinberg principal describes 
a theoretical situation in which there is no 
change in the gene pool. This means that there 
can be no evolution. 




351 


For a test example let us consider a 
population whose gene pool contains the alleles 
B and b. Assign the letter c to the frequency 
of the dominant allele B and the letter d to 
the frequency of the recessive allele b. 

[In most cases you will find that c and d 
are actually notated as p and q by convention 
in science, but for this example we will use c 
and d. ] 

The sum of all the alleles must equal 100%. 


So c + d = 1. 

All the random possible combinations of the 
members of a population would equal (c x c) + 
2cd + (d x d). Which can also be expressed as: 
(c+d) X (c+d) 

We will explain this in detail in moment, but 
it is best to know it for now. 

The frequencies of B and b will remain 
unchanged generation after generation if: 

1. The population is large enough. 

2. There are no mutations. 


3. There are no preferences. For example a BB 
male does not prefer a bb female by its nature. 




352 


4. No other outside population exchanges genes 
with this model. 

5. Natural selection must not favour any 
specific individual. 

Let us imagine a pool of genes. 12 are B 
and 18 are b. Now remember The sum of all the 
alleles must equal 100%. So this means that the 
total in this case is 12 + 18 = 30. So 30 is 
100 %. 


If we want to find the frequencies of B and 
b and the genotypic frequencies of B, Bb and b 
then we will have to apply the standard formula 
that we have just been shown. 

f (B) - 12/30 - 0.4 - 40% 

f (b) = 18/30 = 0.6 = 60% 

Both add to make 100%. Now we know their 
ratios . 

So, 

c + d = 0.4 + 0.6 — 1 

We have proven that c + d must equal 1. 


Very straightforward, yes. 




353 


Remember that all the random possible 
combinations of the members of a population 
would equal (c x c) + 2cd + (d x d) , or (c+d) X 
(c+d) 

Then, c+d=0.4+ 0.6=1 
And (c x c) + 2cd + (d x d) 

= BB + Bb + bb 


= .24 + .48 + .30 = 1 

This means that the population can increase in 
size, but the frequencies of B and b will stay 
the same. 


Now, suppose we break the 4th law about not 
introducing another population into this one. 

Let us say that we add 4 more b. 

b + b + b + b enter the pool. This brings our 
total up to 34 instead of 30. What will the 
gene and genotypic frequencies be? 




354 


f (B) - 12/34 - .35 - 35 % 
f (b) = 22/34 = .65 - 65% 


f (BB) = .12, f (Bb) = .23 and f (bb) = .42 

Oppss, .42 does not equal 1. This means that 
the Equilibrium law fails if the 4th law is not 
met. When the new genes entered the pool it 
resulted in a change of the population's gene 
frequencies. However if no other populations 
where introduced then the frequency of .42 
would be maintained generation after 
generation. 


However we would like to point out that we used 
a very small pool in the above example. If the 
pool were much larger then the number of 
changes, even if one or two new genes jumped 
in, would be insignificant. You could calculate 
it, but the change would be on an extremely low 
level 0.000000000001 of a difference in 
reality. 


This is just as basic example to get you 
started. It may not make complete sense at 
first but if you read on then it will fall into 
place. Some of you may be asking the question. 


How do I know if a trait, such as bud colour is 
Homozygous Dominant (BB), or Heterozygous (Bb) 




355 


or Homozygous Recessive, (bb) ? 

If you have been given seeds or a clone you 
may have been told that a trait, such potency 
is Homozygous Dominant, Heterozygous or 
Homozygous Recessive. However, you will want to 
prove this to yourself. Especially if you are 
going to use that plant in a future breeding 
plan. You will have to do what is called a Test 
Cross . 


THE TEST CROSS 

Determining the phenotype of a plant is 
fairly straightforward. You look at the plant 
and you see its phenotype. Determining the 
genotype can not be done through visible 
observation alone. The genes themselves are 
somewhat hidden except for their visible 
related phenotypes. 

Again there are three possible genotypes 
that the plant can create. Let's say golden bud 
is dominant and silver bud is recessive. Here 
is the table. 


Homozygous Dominant: BB 
Heterozygous: Bb 
Homozygous Recessive: bb 


= Golden Bud. 
= Golden Bud 
= Silver Bud. 


(The Golden and Silver bud colours are the 
phenotype. The b and B are genotype notations.) 




356 


The reason why Bb is golden and not silver 
is because B dominates b. 

Most phenotypes are observed 
characteristics but some things like bud taste 
are also phenotypes that can not be observed. 

If we look at a Mostly Sativa species like a 
Haze plant we will notice that it is pale 
green. Now in a population of Haze plants we 
may notice that the one or two out of one 
hundred maybe dark green and not pale green. 
This suggests that the pale green colour is 
recessive. We are not totally sure until we 
have completed the test but the gene 
frequencies suggest this. We may also notice 
that the bud is golden on most of the plants so 
this suggests that the golden bud colour is a 
dominant trait. Some of the buds on only a few 
of the plants may be silver. This suggests that 
silver trait is Recessive (bb in our example). 

We know that the only genotype that 
produces the recessive trait is homozygous 
recessive (bb). So if a plant shows a recessive 
trait in its phenotype, its genotype is 
probably homozygous recessive. 

A plant with a recessive trait always has a 
homozygous recessive genotype. 




357 


But this leaves us with a problem. Is the 
Golden bud or pale green leaf colour a 
Homozygous Dominant (BB) or is it Heterozygous 
(Bb) . 

So now is the time to perform the Test 
Cross. Any test cross is a cross of an organism 
with an unknown dominant genotype (like in our 
case) with an organism that is homozygous 
recessive for that same trait. 

To do this test we need another cannabis 
plant of the opposite sex that is homozygous 
recessive (bb) for the same trait. So we will 
stick with bud colour as our example. Hey, we 
have a few silver bud plants around that we 
think are recessive. Let's use them and see 
what happens. We pollinate the female plant 
(Does not matter if the female is dominant or 
recessive one), and we get our seeds and plant 
them. 3-7 months later we see the results. 

This brings us to the next important rule 
that we will learn. 

If any of the offspring from a test cross 
have the recessive trait, the genotype of the 
parent with the dominant trait must be 
Heterozygous. 


We will explain why in a moment and this 
will all make sense to you. Also we must 
mention that we should be talking about a large 
population here. 1000 plants is a good 




358 


population to be sure with. 100 plants are good 
but 20 or less can be dodgy. 

The more plants we use the more reliable 
our results will be. 


In our example, our unknown genotype is 
either BB or Bb. The Silver genotype is bb. 

Let's put this information into a mathematical 
series known as Punnett Squares. 



b 

b 

B 



? 




We start by first putting in out known 
genotypes (above). We only do these 
calculations for 2 parents that will breed. We 
know that our recessive trait is bb and the 
other is either BB or Bb, so we use the term B? 
for the time being. Our next step is to fill in 
the box with what we can calculate. 



b 

b 

B 

Bb 

Bb 

9 

?b 

?b 



















359 


The first row of offspring Bb and Bb will 
have the dominant trait of Golden Bud. The ?b 
and ?b can either be Bb Bb, or bb bb. This will 
either lead to an offspring that will produce 
more golden bud (Bb), or silver bud (bb). There 
are 2 possible outcomes. Let us fill in the 2 
possible values of ? and see that this is true. 



b 

b 

B 

Bb 

Bb 

B 

Bb 

Bb 


The first possible outcome is where ? = B. 
This means the all are offspring will have 
Golden bud. 



b 

b 

B 

Bb 

Bb 

b 

bb 

bb 


Is the second possible outcome is where 
? = b. This means that some of our offspring 
will have golden bud (Bb) or Silver bud (bb). 

The first possibility proves that there is 
no way we can produce silver bud in the 
off spring. 

The second possibility proves that we will 
























360 


have some golden bud and some silver bud. Not 
only that but we can understand clearly what 
the frequency will be. Count them! 

Bb + Bb = 2Bb 
bb + bb = 2bb 

2 out of 4 will have golden bud. 2 out of 4 
will have silver bud. Half out offspring will 
have silver bud! The ration is 50:50. 

The second possibility tells us a number of 
things. 

(1) Both parents need at least one b trait each 
for the silver bud to pass on if it is a 
recessive trait. 

(2) If any silver bud is produced in the 
offspring then the mystery parent B? must be 
Bb. It can not be BB. 

Remember: 

Homozygous Dominant: BB = Golden Bud. 
Heterozygous: Bb = Golden Bud 
Homozygous Recessive: bb = Silver Bud. 

So if the golden bud parent when crossed with a 
silver bud parent produced only Golden Bud, 
then the parent must be Homozygous Dominant for 
that trait. If the parent produced any silver 
bud then it must be Heterozygous. 




361 


The 

rules are: 

1 . 

The plant with the dominant trait is always 

crossed with an organism with the recessive 

trait. 

2 . 

If ANY offspring show the recessive trait. 

the 

unknown genotype is heterozygous 

3. 

If ALL the offspring have the dominant 

trait, the unknown genotype is homozygous 

dominant 

4 . 

Large numbers are needed for reliable 


results . 


And this is your first step into the world 
of breeding because: 

(1) When you breed plants you want to continue 
a trait. Something that you like to see on your 
plant or taste with your plant or the height of 
your plant. 

(2) When you want to continue that trait you 
must know if it is Homozygous Dominant, 
Heterozygous or Homozygous Recessive. 

(3) You can find that out by running a test 
cross . 

So the question may arise. How do I breed 
for several traits? Like taste, smell, vigour 
and colour. Well that is a big question. Maybe 
to understand more about that we should learn 
more about Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium. 




362 


Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium Part 2 


If we mate two individuals that are 
heterozygous (e.g., Bb) for a trait what will 
we find? (Let's make the punnet square). 



B 

b 

B 

BB 

Bb 

b 

Bb 

bb 


Look at that. In this group our resulting 
offspring will be: 

1 BB, 

2 Bb, 

1 bb 

This means that: 

25% of their offspring are homozygous for the 
dominant allele (BB). 

50% are heterozygous like their parents (Bb) 
and 

25% are homozygous for the recessive allele 
(bb) . 

Now look at this closely. Unlike their 
parents Bb Bb, 25% will express the recessive 















363 


phenotype bb. So if we where given two parents 
that displayed golden bud but where BOTH 
heterozygous for that trait Bb, we would also 
produce offspring that have silver bud. But 
since Bb is dominant in both parents, neither 
of the parents would display the phenotype for 
silver bud. 

This is really what breeding is all about. 
When we have a strain that we want to keep, how 
do we know that the parts we want to keep will 
actually be kept in our breeding process? 

This is where the test cross comes in. If 
we create seeds from a strain that we bought in 
a seed-bank how can we be sure that the 
offspring will have the character that we like? 
Well the facts are this. If the trait (s) we 
wish to continue are Homozygous Dominant (BB) 
in both the parent plants then there is no way 
we can produce a recessive genotype for that 
trait in the offspring. We already explained 
this in the previous section. 

Let's prove this: 



B 

B 

B 

BB 

BB 

B 

BB 

BB 


Look! It is impossible for the recessive trait 














364 


to appear. 

And if both parents contained the recessive 
trait we can not produce the dominant trait. 

Let us see this in action too. 



b 

b 

b 

bb 

bb 

b 

bb 

bb 


There we proved that too. 

So now we are starting to understand that 
in order to breed a trait properly we must know 
if that that is Homozygous or Heterozygous or 
Homozygous Recessive before we can understand 
what it is we are doing and PREDICT THE RESULTS 
BEFORE THEY HAPPEN. And this ladies and 
gentlemen is what breeding is all about - 
Understanding a trait's genotype, predicting 
the outcome of a cross and LOCKING DOWN TRAITS. 
So how can we lock down a trait you might ask? 
Well we will cover this later after we 
understand a bit more about this subject 
matter. 

Gregor Mendel (1822-1884) was an Austrian 
monk who discovered the basic rules of 
inheritance by analysing results from his plant 
breeding research programs. 














365 


He noticed that 2 types of Pea plants gave 
very uniform results when breed within their 
own gene pool and not with one another. The 
traits he noticed where: 


Pea Plant #1 

Pea Plant #2 

Solid seed shells 

Wrinkled seed shells 

Green seeds 

Yellow seeds 

White flowers 

Purple flowers 

Tall plants 

Short plants 


(This is not a punnet square. Just an example 
to show the different phenotypes seen in two 
different Pea plant strains.) 


He noticed that the offspring all carried 
the same traits when they breed in with the 
same population or gene pool. 

Now since there where no variations in with 
each strain he guessed that both strains where 
homozygous for these traits. Because the pea 
plants where from the same species Mendel 
guessed that either the Solid seed shells where 
recessive or the wrinkled seed shells where 
recessive. So he used the genotype notations 
(SS for solid, ss for wrinkled). He knew that 
they could not be Ss, because one lot did not 
produce any of the other strain's phenotypes 
















366 


when they breed within their own gene pool. 

Let's explain this via 2 basic punnet squares 
where SS = Pea plant#l for the trait of 'solid 
seed shells' and ss = pea plant#2 for the trait 
of 'Wrinkled seed shells'. 



s 

s 

s 

ss 

ss 

s 

ss 

ss 


That was Pea plant#l results. All the 
offspring will be SS. 



s 

s 

s 

ss 

ss 

s 

ss 

ss 


That was Pea plant#2 results. All the 
offspring will be ss. 

The First Hybrid Cross: 


Mendel made his first hybrid cross between 
the 2 strains. The results where all solid 
seeds! Here is the chart below. 
























367 



s 

s 

s 

Ss 

Ss 

s 

Ss 

Ss 


Now up until this point he did not know 
which trait from which plant was recessive or 
dominant. But since all the seeds where solid, 
then he knew that Pea Plant#l contained the 
dominant genotype for seed shape and that Pea 
Plant#2 contained the recessive genotype for 
wrinkled seeds. Also he knew that Pea Plant#2 
contained the recessive genotype for seed 
shape. This means that in future TEST CROSSES 
with other pea strains, he could determine if a 
seed shape trait is Homozygous or Heterozygous 
because he had identified the recessive trait 
(ss) . 

Remember the rule of test crossed to 
determine this? Here it is again. 

1. The plant with the dominant trait is always 
crossed with an organism with the recessive 
trait. 

2. If ANY offspring show the recessive trait, 
the unknown genotype is heterozygous 

3. If ALL the offspring have the dominant 
trait, the unknown genotype is homozygous 
dominant 

4. Large numbers are needed for reliable 
results . 













368 


So the offspring from the last punnet 
square where all Ss. When he crossed 2 parents 
from the bunch of offspring he got the 
following results. 



S 

s 

s 

SS 

Ss 

s 

Ss 

ss 


What he has done here is to mate 2 individuals 
that are heterozygous (e.g., Ss) for a seed 
shape trait. In this group the resulting 
offspring will be: 

SS 

Ss 

ss 

This means that: 

25% of the offspring are homozygous for the 
dominant allele (BB). 

50% are heterozygous like their parents (Bb) 
and 

25% are homozygous for the recessive allele 
(bb) . 


Bingo! Remember this a few pages back? 














369 


In his first cross to create the hybrid 
plant Mendel ended up with NO recessive traits 
for seed shape. But when he crossed the 
offspring because they where heterozygous for 
that trait he ended up some having the 
recessive trait, some having the homozygous 
trait and some continuing the heterozygous 
trait. 

In correct breeding terms his first cross 
between the plants is called the FI cross or FI 
generation. The breeding out of those offspring 
is called the F2 cross or F2 generation. 

Now since he has Ss, ss and SS to work with 
you can probably do the punnet square for each 
to see how they will work out. It would be a 
good time to test your knowledge on this. 
Compare your results with what you have learned 
about ratios in this chapter and you will be 
able to see how it all fits together. It is 
really very simple once you know a few 

rules.but like most things there are 

exceptions to the rules. 

Back to frequencies: 


We know that if two heterozygous parents 
are crossed that the ratios will be 50/50 with 
regards to the allele (Remember the genotype 
can be Ss, SS or ss, but the allele is either S 
or s. Look at the table below when we cross two 





370 


heterozygous parents and count the alleles. 



S 

s 

s 

SS 

Ss 

s 

Ss 

ss 


SS 

Ss 

Ss 

ss 

We can see S S S S (4 x S) and s s s s (4 x s). 

If we break them apart we can see this clearly. 

SS 

S 

S 

(Snap) 

s 

s 

ss 


Again, we know that if two heterozygous parents 
are crossed that the ratios will be 50/50 with 


regards to the allele. 














371 


Now remember Equilibrium? Where we consider 
a population whose gene pool that the sum of 
all the alleles must equal 100%, but we may 
have different ratios? Such as 80% have S and 
20% have s? Well maybe we should look at where 
these laws collapse and where they fail to work 
as expected. 

There are five reasons when the law of 
equilibrium fails to work. These are: 

1. Mutation 

2. Gene migration 

3. Genetic drift 

4. Non-random mating 

5. Natural selection 

Let us go through each one. 

Mutation 


A mutation is the change in genetic 
material, which can give rise to heritable 
variations in the offspring. In nature maybe 
exposure to radiation will do this. In this 
case the result will be a mutation of the 
plants genetic code and thus when it breeds 
with the same population it is effectively a 
'Migration' of foreign genetic material. Even 
though nothing new has been added into the 
population from an outside population, the 
mutation of one single plant will act just like 




372 


another strain that migrated into the gene 
pool. 

Gene Migration 


When we deal with a population of plants we 
refer to a group of plants that breed within 
themselves without any interference from an 
outside population. Over time a population will 
reach equilibrium and this will be maintained 
as long as no other population migrates to this 
one. When another population is introduced it 
will cause new genes to enter the pool. This is 
called Introgression. During the process of 
introgression many new traits will pop up in 
the population. 

Genetic Drift: 


If the population is small equilibrium may 
be violated. By chance alone certain members 
will be eliminated from the population. We will 
find that the frequency of an allele will DRIFT 
towards higher or lower values. 

Non-random mating and Natural selection: 


This suggests that something external may 
influence a population to a stage where mating 
is not random. If some flowers develop earlier 
than others then they will gather pollen 
earlier than the rest. If some of the males 




373 


release pollen earlier than others then the 
mating is not random. Or maybe all males 
release their pollen earlier resulting in some 
of the later flowering females ending up as a 
sinsemilla crop. This means that these late 
flowering females will not make their 
contribution to the gene pool. Again 
equilibrium will not be maintained. 

With regards to natural selection the 
environment may cause a problem with a section 
of plants. If this section does not survive 
then they will not be able to make a 
contribution to the gene pool. If this is the 
case and if selections are made so that other 
plants do not make a contribution then we know 
that trait frequencies can be controlled to a 
certain degree. And the ability to control the 
frequencies of a trait is what BREEDING IS ALL 
ABOUT. 

HOW TO TRUE BREED A STRAIN 


Breeding cannabis strains is all about 
manipulating gene frequencies. Most strains 
that are sold by reputable breeders through 
seed-banks are very uniform in growth. This 
means the breeder has attempted to lock certain 
genes down so that the genotypes of those 
traits are homozygous. 

If we can imagine for a moment that a 




374 


breeder has two strains - Master Kush and 
Silver haze. The breeder lists a few traits 
that they like. * Donates the trait that they 
like . 


Master Kush 

Silver Haze 

Dark Green Leaf 

Pale Green leaf * 

Hashy smell * 

Fruit smell 

White flowers 

Silver flowers * 

Short plants * 

Tall plants 


This means that they want to create a plant 
with the following features and call it 
something like Silver Kush. 


Silver Kush 
Pale Green leaf * 
Hashy smell * 
Silver flowers * 
Short plants * 


Now all the genetics that they need are in both 
of the gene pools for Master Kush and Silver 
Haze. We could just mix both populations and 
hope for the best or we could try to save time, 
space and money by calculating the genotype for 
each trait and using the results to create a 



















375 


TRUE BREEDING STRAIN (An IBL). 


Silver Kush 
Pale Green leaf * 
Hashy smell * 
Silver flowers * 
Short plants * 


The first thing the breeder must do is to 
understand the genotype of every trait that is 
featured in his/her 'ideal' strain. In order to 
do this the genotype of each parent strain or 
population for that same trait must be 
understood. Since there are 4 traits that the 
breeder is trying to isolate then 4x2=8 
Genotypes for these phenotype expressions must 
be made known to the breeder. 

Let us take the Pale Green Leaf of the 
Silver Haze for starters. 

The breeder will grow out as many Silver 
Haze plants as they can find. They will then 
note down if any of the population have any 
other leaf colour trait. If not, then the 
breeder will note that the trait is homozygous 
(We will call the trait - M). Now it can either 
be MM or mm. If other coloured leaves appear in 
with the population then the breeder must 
assume that the trait is not homozygous, but 





376 


heterozygous. 

If it is heterozygous then we must lock the 
trait down before we can continue. This is done 
through selective breeding. Let is look closely 
at the parents for a moment. 



M 

M 

M 

MM 

MM 

M 

MM 

MM 


If both parents where MM we would not have 
seen the variations in the population for this 
trait. It is a locked down trait. We know that 
this trait will always breed true in its 
population without any variations. 



M 

m 

M 

MM 

Mm 

M 

MM 

Mm 


If one of the parents were MM and the other 
Mm we would have ended up with a 50/50 
population of both variations. But one is 
clearly homozygous and the other is 
heterozygous. 
























377 


If both where Mm then we would have 25% MM, 
50% Mm and 25% mm. 

Even though we can see the frequencies we 
still do not know if the Pale green leaf trait 
is Dominant or Recessive, but we can find this 
out by performing A Test Cross. 

Now we are not going to go through the Test 
Cross chapter again but we can show you how to 
isolate the genotype that you need, which is 
either MM or mm because we want to breed that 
trait true. We must also keep track of the 
parent plants been used. 

To keep parent plants alive, clone them! 

The exact same genetic material will be passed 
on from clone to clone. 



M 

m 

M 

MM 

Mm 

m 

Mm 

mm 


In this this cross do you see MM offspring 
and the mm offspring? Well by their very nature 
they can not be the same. By running several 
Cross Tests we can isolate the plant that is 
either MM or mm and break away any Mm from the 
group. Whether it is MM or mm, we can still 
breed the trait true by breeding it with other 














378 


parents that are only MM or mm respectively. So 
we may have to do several test crosses to find 
a male and female that have either MM or mm for 
that trait. Once we have done this we have 
isolated the genotype and it will breed true 
within the same population. 

So if we ran a seed-bank company called 
"PALE GREEN LEAF ONLY BUT EVERYTHING ELSE IS 
NOT UNIFORM LTD" then the seeds that we create 
will ALL breed PALE GREEN LEAVES and the 
customer will be happy. In reality though they 
want the exact same plant that won the cannabis 

cup last year.or at least something close 

to it. So we will have to isolate all the 
traits that helped that strain of cannabis to 
win the cup before people are happy with what 
they are buying. I think you get the point. 

How many tests it takes to know the 
genotype is not certain. You may have to use a 
wide selection of plants to achieve the goal, 
but never the less it is still achievable and 
much more so than non-selective breeding in the 
wild. Each trait must be locked down in a 
population, so that the population for that 
trait is homozygous. The next step is to lock 
down other traits in that same population. 

Now here is the hard part. When you are 
working on a trait you must keep the other 
traits that you are looking for in mind. 





379 


By breeding alone you may accidentally lock 
down another trait that you do not want or even 
remove traits that you want to keep. If this 
happens then you will just have to work harder 
at keeping the traits that you want and 
exploring genotypes through multiple Cross 
Tests. Eventually through selection and keeping 
records you will end up with a plant that is 
true breeding for all the features that you 
want. The gene pool is there but the objective 
is to lock down the traits of the pool. Also by 
keeping your own records you will be building 
up your own little map of cannabis genes. For 
instance if someone grows Blueberry from a 
known breeder and asks what the berry taste 
genotype is, you might be able to tell them a 
little bit about your experiences and what you 
found. This may help them cut corners. Maybe 
one day we will be able to genetically map 
cannabis and everything will be much easier. 

Also a breeder never sits back and says 
"Right! I am going to be on the lookout for all 
1000 traits that I want." That is crazy. What 
they need to do is concentrate on the main 
phenotypes that will make their plant unique in 
some way. Once they have locked down 4 or 5 
traits they can them move on. Step by step is 
how True breeding strains are created. If 
anyone says that they developed a true breeding 
strain in 1 or 2 years then you can be sure 
than the genetics they started with where 




380 


somewhat true breeding in the first place. 
(Known true breeding strains like Skunk#l and 
Afghani#l have taken 20 years to get to the 
stage they are at now.) 


Silver Kush 
Pale Green leaf * 
Hashy smell * 
Silver flowers * 
Short plants * 


Eventually you will have your Silver Kush 
strain but only with the 4 genotypes that you 
wanted to keep. You may still have a variety of 
non-uniform plants in the group. Some may have 
purple stems, others may have green stems, some 
might be very potent, and others might not be 
so potent. By constantly selecting new traits 
that you want to keep, you can manipulate the 
strain into a totally true breeding strain for 
every phenotype. However it is extremely 
unlikely that such a strain exists on the 
market that is 100% true breeding for every 
single phenotype. Such a strain would be called 
'A perfect IBL'. If you are able to lock down 
90% of the plant's phenotypes in a population 
then you can claim that your plant is an IBL. I 
think in today's world that this would be an 
acceptable % to reach. 





381 


The core Idea behind this technique is to 
find what is known as a 'Donor' plant. A Donor 
plant is one that contains a true breeding 
trait (homozygous Dominant) for that trait. The 
more lock down traits are homozygous Dominant 
the better are your chances of developing an 
IBL. 


IBL is short for In Breed Line. This does 
not mean that the line of genetics will be true 
breeding for every trait, but in general this 
terminology (IBL) used by breeders does refer 
to a strain as being very uniform in growth for 
a high % of the strains phenotypes. 

Let us use the example of hamster. In a 
litter of hamsters we may find that they all 
have the same phenotypes. If that population 
reproduces and no other phenotypes crop up then 
we can consider the fact that these hamsters 
come from an In Breed Line. If the hamsters 
continue to breed and all show the same traits 
without variation then we know for certain that 
the gene pool has been locked down. 

There are some breeding techniques that you 
may like to know about. These techniques can 
seriously breach the law of Hardy-Weinberg's 
Equilibrium. Which in our case can be a good 
thing because it will reduce a trait in a 
population or promote a trait in a population. 




382 


The strain MAY not be true breeding for the 
selected traits, but it will certainly help 
make the population more uniform for that 
trait. 


CUBING AND BACKCRQSSING 

Our first cross between the Master Kush 
plant and the Silver Haze is known as the Fl 
hybrid cross. Let us pretend for the moment 
that both traits are homozygous for leaf 
colour. The Haze is pale green the Kush is Dark 
Green. Which one is MM or mm we do not know? 
Until we see the offspring. 



m 

m 

M 

Mm 

Mm 

M 

Mm 

Mm 


This Fl cross will result in hybrid seeds. 
Now since M is dominant over m, then we will 
know which colour is more dominant and from 
which parent it came from. In the example let 
us pretend that the overall results are pale 
green. This means that the pale green allele is 
dominant over the dark green. 

M = Silver Haze pale green leaf trait is 
dominant. 

m = Master Kush dark green leaf trait is 


recessrve. 














383 


But we also know that because no variations 
occurred in the population that both parents 
where homozygous for that trait. However ALL 
the offspring are heterozygous. 

Now here is where we can take a big short cut 
in manipulating the gene pool for that 
population. 

By cloning the parent plant MM, we can use this 
clone in our cross with the Mm offspring. This 
is known as a BACKCROSS. Obviously if our 
parent is female then we will have to use males 
from the Mm selection in out backcross. 



M 

m 

M 

MM 

Mm 

M 

MM 

Mm 


Now out first backcross will result in 50% 
being homozygous for that trait (MM) and 50% of 
the offspring being heterozygous (Mm) for that 
trait! 


If we did not backcross but just used the 
heterozygous offspring for the breeding 
programme we would have ended up with: 





384 



M 

m 

M 

MM 

Mm 

m 

Mm 

mm 


which is 25% Homozygous Dominant (MM ), 50% 
Heterozygous (Mm), and 25% Homozygous Recessive 
(mm) . 

So backcrossing will seriously control the 
frequencies of a specific trait in the 
off spring. 

The first backcross is simply called A 
BACKCROSS. Now let us see what happens when we 
do our second backcross using the same PARENT 
that we are keeping alive through cloning. Our 
second backcross is referred too a SQUARING. 

Since we are dealing with only 2 types of 
offspring Mm and MM we will either repeat our 
results. 



M 

m 

M 

MM 

Mm 

M 

MM 

Mm 


Which is the same as our results from our first 
backcross.Or 

























385 



M 

M 

M 

MM 

MM 

M 

MM 

MM 


All the offspring will be MM and thus true 
breeding for that trait. Those offspring are 
the results of squaring. We have not really 
cubed anything here, but this is a good example 
to get you started because it shows how we can 
manipulate a population by backcrossing. 

Cubing in reality is less controlled than 
this. Cubing is a way of increasing the 
frequency in a population for a certain trait. 
It MAY not result in true breeding but it will 
promote a trait in a bunch of plants. Also the 
actual selection process is somewhat random. 

In a population we select a mother plant 
that we want to keep because of her features. 

In the same population we gather pollen from 
50% of the males that have characteristics 
similar to the mother plant and 50% that do 
not. The pollen is mixed is their respective 
portions. So we have two packets of pollen in 
the end. We must clone the female to create 2 
females. We then use the 2 packets of pollen on 
each clone separately. 













386 


When we grow out the offspring from the two 
females we will select the population of the 
offspring that mostly resembles the mother 
plant traits that we are looking to promote in 
the population. What happens is that the best 
male pollen should have been selected by the 
female as the one that she prefers. The reason 
for taking the 2 sets of pollen from 2 sets of 
males is to create a control experiment to show 
how this method actually interferes with the 
frequencies of the gene pool. By right, your 
selection of poor male pollen will only bring 
about a poorer quality population that do not 
resemble the female clone. 

In reality we only select pollen from the 
best males that most resemble the female when 
we use this method. 

Do you remember one of the laws that breaks 
equilibrium? Non-random mating and Natural 
selection. Well that is what we are doing here. 

The resulting offspring should have a high 
frequency for the traits that we like in the 
mother plant. 

The problem is that we do not know which 
male from the bunch is the one that WON this 
female over, but it is quicker and less time 
consuming in creating a strain that is somewhat 
uniform for a specific trait. 

By repeating the process we can help 
increase the mother plants trait frequency in 
the offspring's population but we will probably 




387 


end up with some plants that are non-uniform 
for that trait. 

The best way to achieve this process is as 
follows. Find a female that you like and clone 
this female and her farther. Take pollen from 
the farther and pollinate the female. The 
offspring should contain a 50%/50% of the genes 
for both parents. 

Take pollen from the males of that 
offspring and mix them together. Pollinate a 
clone of the mother. This step should insure 
that selection is no longer random and you are 
promoting the frequency of the mother's traits 
in the next offspring. 

Repeat the process two more times and you 
will have effectively CUBED (meaning backcross 
x 3) this strain. This can push the mother 
plants traits as high as 90% in a population 
but we will probably get some non-uniform 
plants in the offspring too. 

Cubing does not really help us to select 
for traits that we want, like in our Silver 
Kush experiment. It simply helps us to keep a 
few traits that a mother plant has. Cubing is a 
common procedure adopted by breeders who find a 
good healthy mother plant in a selection of 
seeds that someone has given them. 

This method can also fail very quickly if 
your selection of males are the wrong choice. 




388 


SELFING 


Selfing is the ability for a plant to 
produce seeds without the aid of another plant. 
This refers to hermaphrodite plants that self- 
pollinate. There is no such thing as a 'gene 
pool' or population with regards to 
hermaphrodites since the only pollen that a 
hermaphrodite will use is the pollen that it 
generates itself. Both male and female flowers 
are located on the same plant. There can be 
variations in the offspring though. 

It is impossible for a hermaphrodite to 
create any male only plants. A hermaphrodite 
may create female only seeds and hermaphrodite 
seeds. Also the female only seeds may carry the 
hermaphrodite trait. 


Extra Notes on Selfing by Vic High: 


[These notes where taken from a commentary that 
took place on the Internet and are worth 
reading. Provided by Vic High, BCGA breeder] 




389 


Notes and Interviews by Mr XX 


100% Female Seeds 

Posted by TheSiliconMagician on February 13, 
1999 at 05:17:41 PT: 

As some of you know I have been a regular 
in the chat room for awhile now and I spend 
large amounts of time in there. Anyway, I have 
had the extreme pleasure of speaking to Mr. XX. 
over the last few nights for many hours and 
have gotten to know him quite well via E-mail 
and the chat. As it turns out he confided in me 
and a few others about his process for coming 
up with 100% Seeds. 

Now, Mr. XX is a very nice guy. Funny to 
and its always a pleasure to speak with him. 

The guy does not speak English too well but his 
wit comes through the rough language and he’s a 
riot to talk to. He is a pure lover of 
cannabis. He feels that everyone should share 
and share alike and help the community in 
general. 

He simply wants to share his knowledge with 
the cannabis community because he has spent 15 
years researching this and I spoke with him in 
depth about it. Done with Mr.XX's permission 
because he wants everyone to be able to do 




390 


this . 


He stressed literally hundreds of plants 
with an irregular photoperiod. 

What he does is put the lights on 12/12 for 10 
days. Then turns the lights on 24 hours, then 
12/12 again for a few days, then back to 24 
hours for a day, then 12/12 again for a few 
weeks. 

If he does this and no hermaphrodites come 
up. He has found a 100% XX female that cannot 
go hermaphrodite naturally. He says that your 
chances of finding a 100% XX female is vastly 
increased when using Indica genetics. He told 
me that the more Afghani or Nepalese genetics 
the plant has, the better the chances of 
finding a natural XX female. His exact words 
were "Where did Mother Nature give weed a home 
at originally?" 

I tried to get him to narrow it down to a 
ratio, but he never specified just how many 
plants per are XX females his exact words are 
"plenty of XX girls for everybody" and that is 
all he will say on the subject. Only that it 
takes a lot of time and a lot of plants to find 
that one female. 

He then uses Gibrellic acid. 30 centilitres 
of water with 2 grams of Gibrellic acid 
[Authors note: This is an incorrect amount 




391 


please follow the directions at the end of this 
section next to the * mark. TSM did correct 
himself but not in this post. He did so later 
on. ] 

(Continued) and 2 drops of Natruim Hydroxide to 
liquefy the Gibrellic. Then applies as normal 
and creates the male flowers. He has as pud 
said gotten down to the 4th Generation with 
NO loss of vigour, NO genetic deficiencies and 
NO hermaphrodites. He claims that the plants 
are EXACT GENETIC CLONES of one another. 
Complete sisters. Basically it's clone from 
seed instead of from normal cloning methods. 


Posted by TheSiliconMagician on February 
13 , 1999 at 05:17:41 PT: 

Mr.XX also says that it is easy for the 
home grower to find an XX female. It's a very 
time consuming process but a straightforward 
one. He says that home growers should confine 
themselves to ONE strain. Mr. XX used a Skunk#l 
x Haze x Hawaiian Indica. He says to separate 
those plants from your main grow and stress the 
hell out of them. Do this over and over with 
every new crop of seeds you get of that strain 
until you find the XX female. While this is 
probably difficult it is by no means 
impossible. 




392 


Another anecdote "The slimmer the fingers 
the harder it is to find the XX girls", so if 
you have that Columbian Sativa.. it is going to 
be nearly impossible for you to find that 1 
female., he says it's possible, but very 
unlikely.. TSM 

* CORRECTION: 0.02g of Gibrellic, NOT 2 
grams 


And this concludes the chapter on Basic 
Breeding. Hopefully in later editions we will 
be to expand on what we have mentioned here and 
show you some examples of some breeding 
projects and how they work. In the meantime you 
should have enough information here to start 
work on your own cannabis strain. 

I wish to thank Vic High, Chimera and 
Strawdog for making a major contribution to 
this chapter . 




393 


Chapter 16 

STRAIN INDEX 

This section contains a list of cannabis 
strains that you will more than likely come 
across if you shop around. 

KEY 

* = A very good strain. 

** = Suitable for new growers. 

*** = Not suitable for new growers. 

TB = Indicates an IBL strain. 

OUT = Not suitable for indoors. 

P = High potency. 

C = No seeds available. Clone format only. 




394 


INDICA STRAINS 

Afghani - *, **, TB, 

Afghani #1 - *, **, TB, P 

Bazooka 

BC Hash Plant 

Black Domina - P 

Champagne - P, C 

Cream Sodica 

Domino 

Durga Mata 

G-13 -P, C 

Hindu Kush - *, **, TB 

KC3 6 

Kong 

Kush **, TB, 

M-9 

Mango 

Mangolian Indica 
Masterkush - *, ** 

Mazar 

Northern Lights - *, **, TB, P 

Pluton 2 

Purple Star 

Romberry - *, P 

Shishkeberry - *, P 

Shiva **, P 




395 


Slyder 
Twilight 
Williams Wonder 

MOSTLY INDICA STRAINS 


Aurora Borealis 
Big Bud - *, ** 

Big Treat 

Blueberry - *, ** 

Buddha 

Chemo C 

Chitral 
Chronic -* 

Early Bud 

Early Girl -*, ** 

Eclipse 
El Nino 

Great White Shark P 

Hawaiian Indica x Skunk #1 
Hawaiian/Skunk 
Himalayan Gold —* 

Inca Spirit 
K2 

M3 9 -* 

Matanuska Valley ThunderFuck C 




396 


MCW (Mighty Mite x 
Mister Nice 
Misty 

Northern Lights #1 
Northern Lights #2 
Northern Lights #5 
Peak 19 
Romulan -* 

Sensi Star 
Shiva Shanti 
Sweet Tooth -* 

Texada Timewarp 
Top 44 ** 

Yumbolt -* 


Chemo x Widow) 


_ k k k 

r r 


p 


(Oasis) 

_ k k k 

r r 



k k 

P 


_ * 


* * 


r 


P 


SATIVA STRAINS 


Cambodian -***, p, OUT 

Durban Thai x Cinderella 99 -***, p 

Haze Strains -***, TB, P, OUT 

Malawi -***, OUT 

Swazi -***, TB, P, OUT 

Thai -***, TB, P, OUT 




397 


MOSTLY SATIVA STRAINS 


B-52 

Beatrix Choice 

Cinderella 88/99 , **, P 

Durban 

Durban Poison , **, P 

Durban X Skunk 
Durban/Thai -***, P, OUT 
Early Pearl - *, ** 

Early Skunk - *, ** 

Haze #1 -***, p, OUT 

Haze #19 -***, p, OUT 

Haze Skunk -***, p, OUT 

Kali Mist **, P 

Lambs bread Skunk P 

Mexican Sativa -***, OUT 

Mullimbimby Madness ***, p, 

Neville's Haze ***, P, OUT 

Original Haze ***, p, OUT 

Power Plant **, P, OUT 

Pure Haze -***, p, OUT 
Purple Haze , ***, p, OUT 

Purple Skunk ***, p, OUT 


OUT 

TB 




398 


Sensi Skunk 

_ * 

t 

**, TB, 

P 

Shaman -* 




Silver Haze 

_* 

r 

■k -k -k p 

t r t 

OUT 

Skunk #1 

_ * 

r 

**, TB, 

P 

Skunk Passion 

_ * 



Skunk Red Hair 




Super Haze 

_ * 

r 

~k -k -k P 

r r r 

OUT 

Super Silver Haze 

_ ~k ~k ~k ~k 

r r 

P, OUT 

Swazi X Skunk 

_ ~k ~k ~k 

, OUT 


Voodoo 





INDICA / SATIVA MIX STRAINS 


AK-47 P 

Apollo 11 P 

Blue Heaven 
BubbleGum **, P 

California Indica 
California Orange 
Dutch Dragon - *, **, P 

Early Riser - * 

Euforia P 

Flo -* 

Fruit Loop 
Green Spirit 
Hawaiian Indica -* 

Holland's Hope 
Jack Flash P 

Jack Herer P 




399 


Juicy Fruit -* 

KC 33 

Killer Queen P 

Leda Uno 
Mighty Dutch 
Nebula 
Night Queen 
Orange Crush -* 

Orange Strains 
Plum Bud 
Pole Cat -* 

Purple #1 ** 

Purple Power ** 

Rosetta Stone -* 

Shiva Skunk **, TB 

Silver Pearl -* 

Skunk Indica ** 

Space Queen -* 

Special K 
Stonehedge -* 

Super Skunk **, TB, P 

Trance -* 

White Rhino 
White Russian -* 

White Widow **, TB, P 

This concludes the list of known strains on 

the market today. We will be updating this list 
with more feedback from you, the reader. 




400 


Chapter 17 


HOW TO MAKE HASH 

Hash is a compressed format of the cannabis 
drug but it is not just compressed bud. In fact 
compressed bud has nothing to do with Hash 
contrary to public belief. 

Cannabinoids are the major drugs produced 
by the cannabis plant. We have already looked 
at Trichomes and we understand that these tiny 
stalked resin glands contain our THC and other 
cannabinoids. We also know that female flowers 
produce the majority of the little trichomes. 
Now this is all over the flower's surface and 
is correctly referred too as "stalked capitate 
trichomes". Since we are on this topic we will 
ask you to refer to Figures 1.12 and 1.14 in 
chapter 1. The gland heads (the rounded tips) 
secrete the major cannabinoids within an oil¬ 
like substance that you can remove by rubbing 
your fingers over the bud. We normally refer to 
this substance as resin. The stalks that 
support the gland head are secondary to the 
head in cannabinoid production amounts. The 
gland and the stalks may also burst. In the 
case of a strain like afghani#l that is thick 
with resin, this sometimes-explosive action of 
the gland is automatic. 




401 


The reason why the cannabis plant produces 
resin oils is to gather fallen pollen from the 
male plant . 

When we smoke bud, we hope to covert the 
oil into a vapour, which we can inhale. However 
the surface of the flowers is not the only area 
which produce cannabinoids. It is known that 
the bulbous glands on the leaves produce 
cannabinoids and so does the stem, but these 
are only in minor quantities compared to the 
stalked capitate trichomes. 

Hash is made primarily from the collection 
of the stalked capitate trichomes. 

When the collected trichomes are compressed 
they form a blocky mass, which we refer to as 
Hashish. 


HOW TO GATHER THE STALKED CAPITATE TRICHOMES. 


There are many ways to do this, ranging 
from bulk hash production to small finger sized 
quantities. Also each method will produce 
different qualities or grades of hashish. Some 
methods will gather only the trichomes, while 
other methods will gather trichomes and some 
other subsidiary elements like leaf particles 
and branch shavings. Water extraction seems to 




402 


be the best way of achieving trichome 
extraction only. Let us look at each home 
method. We will not discuss other methods used 
for mass production by some eastern countries, 
as these are somewhat substandard to the home 
methods mentioned below. In fact some of these 
'old eastern practices' are less common in 
their native homelands now because of these 
updated methods. 

There is also a preparation process that 
you must go through with your dried plants 
before you attempt any of the methods outlined 
below. 

SKUFF 

When you harvest your bud you will have 
trimmed the leaves away from the bud. This trim 
is what we refer to as Skuff. Skuff should be 
sticky. So whether it is on the stem or branch 
or leaf or bud, if it feels sticky then you can 
use it to extract the resin. Now if you really 
want to be a connoisseur about this then you 
should examine your skuff for trichomes with a 
microscope. If any parts of the skuff do not 
have trichomes then discard them. 

You must take this trim and store it much 
the same way as you would canned bud for 3 to 6 
weeks. 

Also the quality of the overall result can 
not be much better than the genetics that you 




403 


started with in the first place. If you used 
plants that where not very potent then don't 
expect to produce very potent hash from them. 

BASICS OF SCREENING 


Flat Silk Screening: 


Screening is a process much like cheese 
grating but on a much finer level. A silk 
screen is stretched across a square wooden 
frame and nailed tight to it. The screen 
typically has a pour size between 180 to 120 
microns. The smaller the microns the higher the 
quality, but the lesser the amount. The larger 
micron pours will result in larger sieved 
amounts but some leaf matter and branch trim 
will drop through. This will degrade the 
quality of hash that you smoke. Actually 
typical street hash is not nearly as fine or 
better in quality than the larger pour screen 
method. 

The bud is placed over the screen and can 
either be manually dragged across the screen or 
rolled across the screen using a roller. 
Manually it is much easier if you are using 
smaller quantities of bud but for larger 
quantities another method should be adopted 
like the automatic tumbling method. A sheet of 
glass placed under the screen is the best way 
of catching the matter that falls through the 




404 


screen. After the process is finished the 
screen can be patted down to shake any powder 
that is stuck in the pours. 

Flat Metal Screening: 


This is done much like the flat silk screen 
method but before the flat silk is used the bud 
will go through a metal grating process. The 
metal grate is usually made from tough nylon or 
stainless steel and is of equal proportions in 
pour size to the silk screen. By first using 
the metal grate we can remove more matter from 
the bud than the single silk screen would do. 
The bud matter that passes through the metal 
screen can then be sieved through the silk 
screen by shaking the screen back and forth 
over a glass surface. You can end up with 2 
grades of sieved bud residue this way. The silk 
screening should produce mostly trichomes. 

Multiple Screening Method: 


This is a refined version of the above two 
methods. Several screens can be used in this 
method but the average is four of five. Each 
screen running from start to finish should have 
a different micron measurement starting from 
the largest and running down to the smallest 
silk screen. The bud matter is sieved through 
the first screen and then down onto the second 
screen. The process is repeated picking up and 




405 


sieving with each new screen until most of the 
matter has passed through. You should end up 
with several screens that contain bud matter 
running down to the finer trichomes on the last 
screen. This is an excellent way to achieve the 
best results. You should end up with several 
screens each with different qualities of 
cannabis residue. 

PROPER SCREENING METHODS 


Now that you have an idea of what screening 
is about we can look at it in better detail. 
This explanation will apply to all of the above 
screening methods. 

We stated that a metal screen is used first 
followed by a silk screen. Nowadays steel 
fabrics can be bought in sizes that have much 
smaller pours than even the finest silk screen. 

You should typically look for a metal 
screen that is ranged somewhere between 100 
lines per inch to 140 per inch. A common screen 
used by most home hash makers is a screen with 
120 lines. A wooden frame is constructed to 
hold the screen in place on one side. You can 
glue the screen on or nail it into place. 

Take 4 small wooden blocks and place them 
over a sheet of glass or a mirror. Place the 
screen over the blocks. Have a gap of an inch 
or so between the mirror and the screen. Place 
small amounts of skuff on the screen and gently 
role it back and forth across the screen using 




406 


a credit card or similar plastic object. Do 
this very gently, over and back and over and 
back and over and back. You may have to push 
the skuff over and back a hundred times before 
you can see the tiny resin glands gather on the 
mirror below. All this is done with very little 
pressure. 

Once you have collected as much resin 
glands as possible use the card to sweep them 
off the mirror and onto another surface. Now 
take the 'used' skuff and this time apply a bit 
more pressure to it as you roll it back and 
forth across the screen. With this little bit 
of extra force applied you will be able to 
knock through any resin glands that did not 
fall through the first time, but you will also 
push through some veg material such as branch 
shavings and leaf particles. This second round 
of pressing will result in a lower quality 
grade of skuff. 

You see skuff is skuff. From when you cure 
your trim to the point where you sieve it 
through, it is still skuff. Your objective is 
to try and collect as much resin from the skuff 
as possible. You will not end up with hash, but 
you will end up with different grades of skuff 
that can be used to make hash later. 

You can smoke the different grades of skuff 
there and then, but you may notice that it is 
hard to do so. Since this powder is so fine it 
will typically fall from a joint easily or pass 




407 


through the pours of a pipe screen. In order to 
solve this problem we must compress the skuff 
into hashish. This we will discuss later after 
we talk about other extraction techniques. 


Drum Machines: 


A drum machine is an automatic screening 
device. You will probably have to build one 
yourself but this is easy enough to do with the 
right materials. The size of the unit depends 
on how much cannabis you wish to sieve at a 
time. Most drum machines have a 1.5 - 2ft 
diameter. 



This is a simple example of what a drum 
machine looks like. In between the two wooden 









408 


cylinders is the screen. The cannabis trim is 
placed inside this screen and a small motor 
attached to the side rotates the drum. As it 
rotates, very slowly (2 rotations a minute), 
the trichomes drop through the sieve onto the 
surface stand between the legs of the drum. A 
simple mirror or sheet of glass is best used to 
catch the skuff. You can keep the tumbler 
rotating for up to 1 hour to get the most from 
your skuff without applying any pressure. If 
you want to apply more pressure to the skuff 
then place a small wooden cylinder in with the 
barrel. This will help press the skuff as it 
passes under the cylinder. Different sized 
screens can be used to extract better quality 
skuff. 


Water Extraction: 


Resin glands can be removed from the 
cannabis plant by agitating the trim in cold 
water, typically ice cold water or water that 
has been chilled in a fridge overnight. The 
trim is placed in a bucket and the cold water 
is poured in on top. The whole lot is swirled 
or mixed around using a blender. After mixing 
you let it sit for a few minutes before 
scooping out the skuff that is floating on the 
surface. The remaining liquid is strained 
through a sieve. By sieving this liquid through 
a coffee sieve you will be able to collect most 




409 


of the trichomes, as they will not pass through 
with the water. Just let the coffee sieve dry 
and hey presto!, you got excellent grade skuff 
to make hash from. 

The basic idea behind this is that cold 
water breaks the glands away from the leaf 
matter. The glands will eventually sink to the 
bottom of the bucket because they are heavier 
than water. The bulk leaf matter should stay 
afloat which can be easily scooped away. 

HOW TO PRESS SKUFF INTO HASH 


Again the quality of the skuff will 
determine the quality of hash that you will 
smoke. Remember on the first chapter we talked 
about Zero Zero? 

Well this is a term used to grade the 
quality of hashish. The simple ratio is 
cannabinoids : vegetable material. Good quality 
hashish has high ratio of cannabinoids to 
vegetable material. 00 is a term used by 
Moroccans to express that the hash has the 
highest level of cannabinoids to vegetable 
achieved by their extraction process. You can 
almost imagine that this is the finest skuff 
available compressed into hashish. To compress 
hashish is simple. 




410 


Take your fine skuff and put into a 
cellophane bag. Fold it into a block shape. 

Tape the ends of the cellophane down to create 
the package. 

Press it with your hands to make it more 
even and try to create the best square block 
you can with it. Use a pin to make a few holes 
on both side of the bag. Just scatter a few 
around. A hole per square inch is a good 
measurement to go by. 

Get two or three newspaper pages and dampen 
it down with a cloth that has just been rinsed. 
Don't break the paper just dampen it down. Set 
an Iron to low heat and place the newspaper 
over the cellophane bag. Hold the iron down 
over the paper and press it down with medium 
pressure for fifteen seconds. Turn the bag over 
and place the newspaper on top again. Wet it 
down if need. Press again for the same amount 
of time. You should only have to do this twice. 

Let the bag cool for five minutes and 
remove the cellophane. Voila! You have a nice 
block of hash like in picture on the 
introduction to this book. Easy as pie! Also 
your quality of hash will be better than the 
street hash you find on the market. Street hash 




411 


tends to be made from the less finer skuff 
material to make more blocks of hash at a 
lesser quality. If you smoke homemade hash then 
you will probably understand why 90% of street 
hash is sold at rip-off prices. Those big ounce 
chucks you buy probably only contain 10% of the 
good stuff, if any at all! 

Many countries use most of these techniques 
to make hash. You can almost imagine that in 
order to achieve bulk amounts you will have to 
use a lot of skuff in conjunction with a lot of 
employees or several drum machines working 
around the clock. 

As a ratio you will find that in order to 
produce 50grams of good quality hashish you 
will need about 900grams of dry trim. That is a 
ratio of about 1:18 




412 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS 


Acidity: Acidity is indicated by the pH value Below 7. 

Aerate: Loosening or puncturing the soil to increase water penetration. 
Afghani: A short Indica land race strain from Afghanistan. Very resinous. 
Air layering: A specialized method of cloning a plant which is 
accomplished by growing new roots from a branch while the branch is 
still connected to the parent plant. 

Alkaline: Having a pH value of above 7. 

Alternate host: One of two kinds of plants on which a parasitic fungus 
must develop to complete its life cycle. 

Alternate: To be "located directly across from" or can apply to stamens 
when between the petals. 

Annual: Completing life cycle 

Awn: A slander bristle-like appendage usually at the end of a structure. 


Bactericide: A chemical compound that kills or inhibits bacteria. 

Bale: Any package of marijuana weighing over 10 lbs. 

Ballast: A transformer used with HID lighting equipment. 

Bhang: An Indian and Middle Eastern drink made from cannabis. 
Biennial: Completing the life cycle in two growing seasons. Cannabis is 
not biennial. 

Biological Control: Total or partial destruction of pathogen populations by 
other organisms. 

Blight: Rapid death of a leaf 

Blotch: A disease characterized by large irregular spots on a leaf. 

Blue light: Mercury based light. 

Blunt: A joint rolled in a tobacco-leaf wrapper. 

Bong: A water-cooled pipe made from glass. 




413 


Bonsai: The art of growing carefully trained plants. 

Bract: A small leaf or scale-like structure associated with and subtending 
an inflorescence or cone. 

Bud: Female flower. 


Caespitose: Growing in tufts. 

Calyx: Outer whorl of flowering parts; collective term for all the sepals of 
a flower. 

Cambium: The thin membrane located just beneath the bark of a plant. 
Canker: A canker is a necroticoften sunken area on a stem, trunk, or 
branch of a plant. 

Cannabinoids: The psychoactive compound found in cannabis. 

Chillum: A small fat pipe made of clay. 

Chlorophyll: The green pigment in leaves. When present and healthy 
usually dominates all other pigments. It is important in the conversion of 
C02 and H20 into glucose. 

Chlorosis: Chlorosis is the yellowing of normally green tissues due to the 
destruction of the chlorophyll or the partial failure of the chlorophyll to 
develop. 

Chronic: A strain of cannabis or a high-quality cannabis weed. 

Clasping: Leaf partly or wholly surrounding the stem. 

Clones: Rooted Cuttings. Normally considered female in the context 
they are spoken about unless directed otherwise. 

C02: The chemical formula for carbon dioxide. 

Cola: Refers to the main branch of cannabis flowers located at the top of 
the stem. 

Colombian: Common imported bud from Colombia. Also a strain. 
Compost: An organic soil amendment resulting from the decomposition 
of organic matter. 

Corolla: Inner whorl of floral parts; collective name for petals. 

Creeping: A plant creeps along a structure usually using the structure for 
support. 




414 


Dieback: Dieback is the progressive death of branches or shoots 
beginning at the tips and moving toward the main stem. 

Dioecious: The male and female flowers on different plants. 

Disease: Any malfunctioning of host cells and tissues that results from 
continuous irritation by a pathogenic agent or environmental factor and 
leads to development of symptoms. 

Dividing: The process of splitting up plants 
Doobie: A common expression for hash or weed. 

Dope: Usually refers to cannabis. Sometimes Heroin. 

Double Digging: Preparing the soil by systematically digging an area to 
the depth of two shovels. 


Epidermis: The outer most layer of cells of the leaf and of young stems 
and roots. 

Evergreen: A plant that never loses all of its leaves at one time. 


Fan Leaves: They are the largest leaves of the cannabis plant that 
gather the most available light. 

Fertilizer: A plant food, which when complete should contains all three of 
the primary elements 
Floret: A Small flower. 

Flower: Seed producing structure of a plant. 

Foliar Feeding: Fertilizer applied in liquid form to the plant’s foliage in a 
fine spray. 

FourTwenty: (420), the time of day that one starts smoking cannabis so 
that it does not interfere with one’s work. 

Fungicide: A compound toxic to fungi. 




415 


Gall: Swelling of plant cells. A result of a pest 

Ganja: Term for pot derived from Indica but associated also with pot 

from Jamaica. 

Genotype: The genetic constitution of an individual, esp. as 
distinguished from the phenotype; the whole of the genes in an 
individual or group. 

Germinate: The process of the sprouting of a seed. 

Glabrous: Smooth, no hairs present. 

Glands: Refers to resin producing part of the cannabis plant. 

Glandular: Bearing glands. 

Grafting: The uniting of a short length of stem of one plant onto the 
rootstock of a different plant. 

Grass: A very common term for cannabis. 

Habitat: Natural setting where a plant grows. Usually refers to a specific 
plant community. 

Hash/Hashish: Compressed Cannabis Resin. 

Hemp: This is the stalk and stems produced from the cannabis plant that 
are used to make fabrics. 

Herb: Another term used loosely to refer to cannabis. 

Hermaphrodite: A trait of plant where both the male and female flowers 
are located on the same plant. 

HID: High Intensity Discharge light system. 

Hookah: A large water pipe from India. 

Host: A plant that is invaded by a parasite and from which the parasite 
obtains its nutrients. 

HPS: A high Pressure Sodium Light. 

Humus: The brown or black organic part of the soil resulting from the 
partial decay of leaves and other matter. 

Hybrid: The offspring of two plants of different species or varieties of 
plants. 

Hydroponics: The science of growing plants in mineral solutions or 
liquid, instead of in soil. 




416 


Indica: A species of cannabis plant. 

Infection: The formation of a parasite within or on a host plant. 

Infectious Disease: A disease that is caused by a pathogen which can 
spread from a diseased to a healthy plant. 

Inflorescence: The flower cluster of a plant. 

Inoculum: The pathogen or its parts that can cause infection. 

Internode : The distance between branches along the stem. 

Joint: A cannabis cigarette. 

Kief: A term from Morocco used to explain a fine grade of quality Skuff. 

Lateral: Referring to side(s) of the plant structure. 

Leaching: The removal or loss of excess salts or nutrients from soil. 
Leaflet: Segment of a compound leaf. 

Leafy: Having numerous leaves. 

Lesion: An area of plant discoloured or diseased tissue. 

Linear: Resembling a line; long and narrow and of uniform width. Also 
refers to uniform growth. 

Loam: A rich soil composed of clay, sand, and organic matter. 

Lobe: A major expansion or bulge-like shape, as at the margin of a leaf 
or petal. 

Lumen: A scientific measurement for luminosity from a light source. 

Manure: Organic matter, usually the excrement of an animal such a 
horse, which is used as a rich fertilizer. 

Margin: The edge, generally of a leaf. 

Marijuana: Another term for cannabis. 

Mary Jane: A codeword for marijuana. 

MH : Metal Halide light system. 

Micronutrients: Mineral elements that are needed by some plants in very 
small quantities. 

Mildew: A powdery growth on the plant’s surface. 




417 


Mother: A selected mother plant kept for its vigour or likable 
characteristics by the grower. It is used for cloning and breeding. 

Mottle: Refers to irregular patterns on the leaf of light and dark areas 
like blotches. 

Mutation: A change in genetic material brought about by an abnormal 
influence such as radiation. 

Native: A plant that occurs and grows naturally in a specific region or 
locality. 

Necrosis: Necrosis is dead tissue on areas of the plant. 

Nematicide: A chemical compound that kills nematodes. 

Nematode: Microscopic, wormlike animals that live in water or soil, or 
as parasites of plants and animals. 

Node: Position on a stem from which one or more structures (especially 
branches) arises. 

NPK: Abbreviation for nitrogen (N), phosphate (P), and potassium (K), 
the three primary nutrients for plants. 

Oil: Refers to cannabis resin when it is not in solid state. 

Organic: This refers to a method of gardening utilizing only materials 
derived from living things and not man made chemicals. 

Osmosis: The process by which a solvent passes through a semi- 
permeable membrane into a region of greater solute concentration, so 
as to make the concentrations on the two sides more nearly equal. 

Paraquat: A defoliant used to kill the cannabis plant around the world. 
Parasite: An organism living on or in another living organism (host) and 
obtaining its food from the latter. 

Pathogen: An entity that can incites disease. 

Peat moss: The partially decomposed remains of various mosses. Used 
as a substrate. 

Peduncle: The stalk of a flower or of a flower cluster. 

Perennial: Living more than two years or growing seasons. 

Perianth: The floral envelopes; collectively the calyx and corolla, 




418 


especially when they are alike. 

Perlite: A form of obsidian consisting of vitreous globules expandable by 
heating and used for insulation but in our case it is used as a plant 
growth medium. 

Petiole: Leaf stalk. 

pH: The pH is a measure of the acidity of a solution. 

Photoperiod: The timed amount of light that a plant receives. 
Photosynthesis: The chemical process in plants in which carbon dioxide 
and water are converted into glucose by the influence of light energy. 
Phototropism: The inclination , which plants have, to grow towards light. 
Phyllotaxy: How leaves are arranged on a branch or stem. 

Pinching: Using the thumb and forefinger to lightly crush a branch or 
stem which promotes further branching and causes the plant to bush 
more. 

Pistil: The ovule-bearing organ of a flower, consisting of stigma and 
ovary, usually with a style in between. 

Pollen: The male gametes or microspores of a seed plant, produced as 
a fine granular or powdery substance in the anthers of a flower or the 
male cone of a gymnosperm and usu. transported by wind or insects. 
Pollinate: Convey pollen to or deposit pollen on (a stigma, an ovule, a 
flower, a plant) and so allow fertilization. 

Pot: Another term for cannabis. 

Potency: The strength of the cannabis drug. Usually measured by the 
THC levels in a plant. 

Predator: A predator is an insect or animal that feeds off other animals, 
insects or plants. 

Pruning: The cutting and trimming of plants to remove dead or injured 
wood , or to control and direct the new growth of a plant. 


Red light: Usually refers to a Sodium based light (HPS). 

Reefer: Another term used for dried cannabis. Specifically a cannabis 
cigarette. 

Resistance: The ability of an organism to exclude or overcome a 




419 


problem. 

rH: Abbreviation for relative humidity. The relative humidity is expressed 
in %and measured with a hygrometer. 

Roach : A filter for a cannabis cigarette. 

Root ball: The network of roots along with the attached soil of any given 
plant. 

Root bound: A condition that exists when a potted plant has outgrown its 
container. 

Roots: The colourless underground, part of a vascular plant (developed 
from the radicle) which serves to anchor it, convey nourishment. 

Rot: Rot is the disintegration, discoloration, and decomposition of plant 
tissue. 

Rust: Rust is a plant disease that gives a "rusty" appearance to an 
infected surface of the plant. 

Sativa: A species of cannabis plant. 

Scorch: Scorch is the burning or drying and browning of leaf margins. 
Usually caused by overfeeding. 

Senescent: The growing old and dying back of plant tissue. 

Sepal: Can mean a leaf or segment of the calyx. 

Serrated: Having jagged edges. 

Sinsemilla: Refers Non-pollinated female cannabis plants. 

Skuff: Sifted resin from the cannabis plant. 

Skunk: An old strain of cannabis that has a strong smell and sour taste. 
Spiciform: Shaped like a spike. 

Spliff: A term used to describe a cannabis cigarette. 

Staking: The practice of driving a stake into the ground next to, and as a 
support for a plant. 

Stamen: The male organ of the flower that bears pollen. 

Stash: A personal amount of cannabis. 

Stigma: The receptive part of the pistil on which the pollen germinates. 
Stipule: Appendage at base of leaf stalk, often leaf- or scale-like. 

Stoma: An organ in the leaves of plants. The stomata allow the plant to 
breathe. 




420 


Stout: Thick and sturdy. 

Substrate: Refers to the growing medium. 

Susceptible: Lacking the inherent ability to resist disease. 

Symptom: The external and internal reactions or alterations of a plant as 
a result of a disease. 

Taxa: A group of plants, defined by the scientific plant classification 
system. 

Terminal: At the tip of a structure. 

Tetrahydrocannabinol/THC: The psychoactive cannabinoid in marijuana 
that is responsible for the high. 

Thai stick: A cannabis sweet made by wrapping cannabis around a thin 
bamboo splint. 

THC: See - Tetrahydrocannabinol/THC. 

Thinning: Removing some plants to allow sufficient room for the 
remaining plants to grow. 

Toke: To inhale cannabis. 

Transpiration: The release of moisture through the leaves of a plant. 
Transplant: The process of moving one plant from it’s medium to 
another medium or another location. 

Underground: A nasty term used to describe a movement of the people 
who grow and share cannabis. 

Vascular: Term applied to a plant tissue or region consisting of 
conductive tissue. 

Vegetative: The growth phase of a plant that occurs before flowering and 
after the seedling stage. 

Vermiculite: Any of a group of hydrated silicates resulting from the 
alteration of biotite and ultra basic rocks; spec, a monoclinic 
aluminosilicate of magnesium occurring as platy yellow or brown crystals 
or foliated scales. Flakes of this mineral used as a moisture-holding 
medium for plant growth or a protective covering for bulbs etc. 

Virus: A sub microscopic obligate parasite consisting of nucleic acid and 
protein. 

Weed: A common term used to describe cannabis. 




421 


Whorl. Group of three or more structures of the same kind (generally 
leaves or flower parts) at the same node. 

Wilt: Wilt is what happens when the leaves of a plant droop. 

Zonked: To be very stoned. Usually refers to the Indica type high. 




422 


CONCLUDING THOUGHTS 

It is by practical application of this book 
that the journey from novice grower to guru is 
achievable. Never try to do more than what you 
can. 

As a whole the following factors are the 
most important in achieving good results. 

-Light 

-Genetics 

-Preventing a problem instead of solving it 

-Air circulation 

-Soil 

-Pot/Container Size 

-Fertilizers 

- 12/12 

Light: 


Without a doubt light is a very important 
factor in bud production and plant growth. 
Although results can be achieved using a 250W 
HID or fluorescent tubes, a 400W HID is better. 
A 600W HID will produce a much better crop than 
a 400W HID and a IK HID is the best single 




423 


light available on the market today. If you are 
not getting the bud sizes that this book is 
showing you then upgrade your light system. It 
still has to be said that not everyone wants to 
grow this amount of bud and a IK HID does cost 
a good bit of money to run. However with a IK 
HID light you will improve your results. 

Also conserving light is important. Use 
reflectors, white walls and Mylar to keep the 
spread of light even and contained in your grow 
room. Any light leaks mean that usable light is 
being lost. You're paying for it so try and use 
as much of it as you can. Your plants will love 
you for this. 

Genetics : 


It goes without saying that a plant with 
genetic traits for low bud production amounts 
and potency will not create an outstanding 
plant. If you start with bad genetics you will 
only end with bad results no matter what you do 
or how good a grower you are. 

If you want to obtain good genetics then 
get your seeds from a seed-bank that advertises 
good strains from reputable breeders. Most of 
the best breeders enter competitions such as 




424 


the 'Cannabis Cup' in Amsterdam. You should pay 
a visit to Amsterdam and sample what the 
breeders have to offer in the coffee shops. The 
coffee shop owners will sometimes tell you 
where you can get seeds from some bud that you 
liked to smoke. 

Most of the cannabis plant pictures in this 
book come from well-known strains that breeders 
have produced. Most of these strains can be 
bought through seed-banks. 

Preventing a problem instead of solving it: 


Prevention is better than cure. Any problem 
will stunt growth to some degree. Solving the 
problem before it happens entails knowing what 
problems to expect during your grow. This book 
has explained some of the problems you will 
face. Healthy plants are rewarding plants. Take 
good care of your plant's health and reap the 
rewards for doing so. 

Air circulation: 


Very important. Outdoor plants do not have 
this problem but indoor plants can sometimes 
stunt or grow weakly if they do not get fresh 




425 


air. Fresh air is important to replace any 
impurities that build up in your grow room. 

Also the percentage of different compounds that 
make up air can change or fluctuate if new air 
is not introduced into the grow room. This can 
cause problems with your grow. Also heat can 
build up in spaces that do not have good air 
ventilation. A rise in temperatures can cause a 
plant to stunt. Keep fresh air moving around 
your grow room at all times for the best 
results. 

Dust is also a problem. In a grow room you 
need to use ventilation to keep dust from 
settling on your sticky bud. Those tiny pistils 
are producing the resin that you want. A big 
blob of dust on a pistil will only stunt its 
growth, not to mention reduce the overall 
effect that the bud has when you sample it. 

Air circulation also brings a mild wind to 
your grow. This is important for stem and 
branch growth. Wind will make the plant react 
by stressing it a little. That reaction is 
thicker stem and branch growth. This is 
important for bud production, as the plant will 
be thicker, stronger and healthier overall. I 
have seen growers use fans in their grow rooms 
that can triple the width of a stem. On more 




426 


than one occasion I have seen indoor stems that 
are 2 inches thick and the plant was only 4 
foot high! That plant produced the most bud in 
the same strain population too. The reason for 
this was because it was located very near to 
the main fan and was directly under the light. 
The growing conditions where optimal for that 
plant. It loved it. 

Soil: 


This is the medium that your plant will 
grow in throughout its life. If the soil does 
not suite cannabis then cannabis will not grow 
well in that medium no matter how good a grower 
you are. You may have to experiment with soil 
before you find a good soil that suites 
cannabis. Do not ever underestimate how 
important soil is. Make sure the pH is right 
and the nutrients that your plant needs are in 
the soil. Soils should hold a bit or water but 
should also drain well. We don't want muds or 
fast draining soils. Find a middle soil that 
does both well. 




427 


Pot/Container Size: 


Also make sure that you use plenty of soil 
in large containers. I can tell you right now 
that a container that is only 4" x 4" will 
stunt your overall yield. You will be able to 
produce close to 0.5 Oz per plant (if the plant 
has good genetics) in a pot of this size, but a 
6" x 6" will allow much more bud growth. A 
standard pot size for higher quantity results 
should be around 12" x 12" or more. I think a 
container that is 24" x 24" is good too, but 
takes up a lot of space. These larger 
containers are for mostly sativa and pure 
sativa species. Indica/sativa. Mostly Indica 
and Indica will grow well in 12" x 12" 
container. 

Fertilizers: 


Cannabis plants like food but not too much 
as we said before. If your provide the food 
that your plant needs then it will provide you 
with good results. However some fertilizers can 
change the taste of your bud. Many people say 
this is a myth but you will be able to taste 
the difference between natural outdoor bud and 




428 


indoor bud that has been chemically treated if 
you smoke enough varieties from various grow 
techniques. 

Some people have complained about headaches 
after smoking indoor cannabis that has been 
burnt through overfeeding. There are many 
reasons for this and one big reason is that the 
grower has not used a feeding solution that is 
for food plants but one that is for plant 
appearance like roses. Some of these non-food 
plant fertilizers contain other ingredients 
than just the standard primary, secondary and 
micronutrients. These extra ingredients can 
sometimes be toxic and a warning label is 
written on the side of the bottle to indicate 
this. The same goes for pest sprays that are 
toxic. This is another good reason why you 
should grow your own bud. 

However if you have read this book then you 
know to stick to food fertilizers only and 
sprays that can be used on food plants. If you 
get your feeding mixtures right you will boost 
the overall performance of your plant. You will 
keep it healthy too. 

Hormones can also increase the overall 
yield and vigour of your plant. In some 
countries hormones are banned because they 




429 


might interfere with a plant's genetics.and 

yours. It is best to read up more on hormones 
before you use them, but most people have used 
hormones, with a good brand name, and have 
achieved larger bud quantities. Hormones can 
sometimes be expensive. 

12/12 ; 

If you use 12/12 and keep your flowering 
room completely light tight, you will improve 
your overall yields. A 100% light tight room 
will increase yields by 30% than a room that is 
only 99% light tight. That is how important 
total darkness is! 


If you can understand and control the above 
points then you will achieve the goal. 

This book will expand on a yearly bases. We 
will be adding new tips and tricks from growers 
around the world to keep up with the times. 

We hope that this book has helped you in 
some way and that you will use it for future 
reference. 

And remember - 


Do not break the law. Before 





430 


you get seeds, clones or grow cannabis check 
your countries laws to make sure that you do 
not conflict with them. We would like you to 
grow cannabis but we do not want you sitting in 
jail cell either. 

Have Fun and thanks for reading this book. 

Greg Green. 

- LIBERATE THE HERB - 




431 


Abuse 

INDEX 

29, 30 

Acid 

169, 187, 192, 193, 269, 323, 346, 390, 412, 418, 420 

Addictive 

29, 30, 33, 34, 305 

Aeroponics 

250, 253 - 255,311 

Afghani 

380, 390, 394, 400, 412 

Air 

22, 97, 133, 157, 158, 169, 172, 197, 198, 201, 202, 233, 236 - 238, 242, 

Air layering 

244, 245, 248, 274 - 276, 304, 330, 334 - 336, 422, 424, 425 

312,412 

Air-cooled 

157, 158,239 

Air-stone 

273,274 

Alga 

266, 273, 

Alkaline 

169, 187, 193,412 

Allele 

343 - 345, 349, 350, 351, 352, 362, 368 - 371, 382 

Alternate 

412 

Animals 

26,318,416-418 

Ants 

322 

Aphids 

322, 323 

Asia 

26, 27 

Attack 

78, 329 

Attic 

112,114 

Automatic hydroponics Pots 250, 257 

Awn 

412 

Backcrossing 

382 - 385, 387 

Bale 

412 

Ballast 

144 . 147 , 154 , 156, 159, 160, 241, 412 

Bamboo 

294, 420 

Basement 

20, 114 

Basket 

140 

Bathroom 

114, 324 

Bees 

97 

Belgium 

30 

Bench 

114, 164, 181 

Bending 

188,292 - 294, 302 

Bhang 

412 

Big Bud 

112, 342, 346, 347,395 

Bleach 

273, 324 - 326 




432 


Blight 412 

Bloom 261, 267, 305 

Blotch 412,417 

Blue light 412 

Blueberry 297, 298, 379, 395 

Blunt 412 

Bong 412 

Bonsai 413 

Boron 195,331, 

Branch 35, 36, 43 - 45, 84, 119, 127, 182, 201 - 203, 207, 224, 225, 228, 234, 

254, 294, 298 - 300, 312, 313, 315, 335 - 337, 402, 403, 406, 412 - 
414, 416 - 418, 425 

Breathe 169, 172, 197, 238, 313, 419 

Breeding 47, 60, 93, 216, 339, 341, 342, 347 - 349, 355, 361, 363 - 365, 369, 373, 
374, 376, 377 - 381, 383, 385, 392, 417 
British Colombia 142 

Bubbler (also called DWC) 271, 272, 275, 304 

Bud 10, 22, 35, 46, 53, 54, 72, 80, 87 - 91, 112, 121, 136, 142, 154, 156, 199, 

207, 210, 212, 216, 225, 226, 227, 233 - 235, 239, 240, 241, 248, 268, 
288, 289, 291, 297 - 299, 301, 302, 305, 314, 316 - 337, 340, 342 - 347, 
349, 354, 355- 361, 363, 395, 399 - 404, 413, 422 - 429 
Bugs (See insects, pests, predators) 126, 329 

Bulbs (See light) 144 - 146, 150, 154, 156, 159 - 161, 164, 166, 229, 237 
Bush 62, 82, 140, 141, 207, 245, 418 

Cabinet 114, 144, 225, 231, 236 - 238, 241, 304, 

Caespitose 413 

Calcium 195 

Calyx 84, 205, 413 

Cambium 413 

Camouflage 140 

Canker 413 

Cannabinoids 32, 46, 47, 52, 54, 337, 400, 401, 409, 413, 420 

Cannabis, death 30 

Cannabis withdrawal 32, 33 

Canning 336, 337, 402 

Canopy 226, 228, 232, 234 

Canvas 335 

Carbon Dioxide(C02) 199, 413, 418 

Cardboard 123,281 




433 


Cash 131 

Caterpillar 319 

Cats 314 

CBD 46 

CBDV 46 

CBL 46 

CBN 46 

CDC 46 

Ceiling 159,241 

Cellophane 410 

Characteristics (See phenotype) 43, 82, 343, 346, 349, 356, 385, 417 
Cheesecloth 102,303 

Chemical burns (See over feeding) 105, 197, 267, 268, 289, 328 - 330, 419, 428 

Chlorine 317 

Chlorophyll 413 

Chlorosis 413 

Chromosome 343, 345, 346 

Clay 173 - 175, 244, 413, 416 

Cleaning (See Sterile) 108, 109, 178, 266, 269, 309, 324 - 327 

Clip (See Pruning) 127, 185, 192, 294, 297, 300, 334, 335, 337 

Clones (See Cutting) 95, 102, 103, 104, 206, 226, 228, 232, 238, 259, 283, 291, 

306 - 313, 324, 355, 377, 383, 385 - 387, 391, 393, 413, 

430 

Clonex 312 

Closet (See Cabinet) 114, 132, 236, 

Cola (See Bud) 35, 39, 125, 180, 221, 225, 228, 230, 282, 288, 294, 296, 297, 

298, 300, 413 

Cold 105, 198, 199, 278, 286, 408, 409 

Colombian 413 

Colour 88, 90, 106, 147, 150, 164, 165, 173, 189, 224, 333, 339, 340, 343, 347, 
349, 354 - 357, 361, 375, 382, 416, 419 
Compost 109, 176, 413 

Container (See Pots) 188, 192, 241, 263, 264, 266, 270, 419, 422, 427 

Copper 195,331 

Corkscrew 302 

Corolla 413,417 

Cottonseed meal 193 

Couch lock 56, 59 

Court 130 




434 


Credit card 97, 131, 406 

Creeping 328,413 

Cross (See Backcross, 

Crossbreed, Heterozygous 

and Hyrbid) 47, 58, 59, 94, 235, 341, 355, 357, 361, 

363, 364, 366, 368, 369, 377, 379, 382, 

383,386 

Crossbreed (See Backcross, Cross, Heterozygous and Hyrbid) 47, 349 

Crystals (See Trichomes) 333,420 

Cubing 382, 385, 387 

Cull 28,324 

Curing 40, 48, 55, 192, 333, 336, 337 

Curling 221,330 

Cuttings (See Clones) 95, 119, 137, 205, 226,263, 289, 291, 308, 309, 312, 313, 

324, 326, 413, 418 
Cutworms 319, 320 

Dangers 28, 105, 120, 167 

Deer 138,315 

Deficiency 195,331, 391, 

Delta-8 THC (see THC) 

Delta-9 THC (see THC) 

Deep water Culture (See DWC and Bubbler) 

Dieback 414 

Dioecious 414 

Discoloration 329, 416, 419, 

Disease 348, 349, 412, 414, 416 

Dividing 414 

Dominant 235, 345, 346, 347 

Donor 381 

Double Digging 414 

Double-potting 180 

Draft (See Cold) 105 

Drainage 173,177, 178, 189,191,245, 250, 252 - 254, 269, 426, 

Drift 371,372 

Drip Irrigation System 250, 253 

Dripper 253 

Driving 31, 141 

Drum machine 407, 408, 411 

DWC (See Deep water Culture and Bubbler) 




435 


Ebb & Flow (See Flood and Drain) 250, 252, 253 

Electricity 73, 112, 130, 134, 144, 159, 163, 167, 242, 318, 324, 325, 

Electro-magnetic spectrum 131, 142, 148, 187 

E-mail 65 

Embryonic 81,82 

Environment 93,110,186, 201 - 203, 207, 238, 278, 290, 297, 304, 339, 373, 
414 

Epidermis 414 

Epsom salts 195,197, 330, 331 

Equator 113 

Equilibrium 348, 349, 354, 361, 362, 371 - 373, 381, 386, 

Evolution 210,350 

Extraction 28, 49, 132, 133, 157, 198, 237, 238, 242, 261, 325, 340, 402, 407 - 409 
FI 369, 382, 386 

F2 369 

Fan 105,106, 133, 157, 158,184, 198, 199- 201, 237,238,239 

Fan Leaves 54, 132, 224, 225, 233, 288, 289, 333, 334, 336 
Father 346 

Feeding (See Nutrients and Fertilizers) 109, 187 - 189, 195 - 197, 217, 268, 275, 

287, 305, 328, 414, 419, 428 


Female, example 85 


Fertilizer (See Nutrients and Feeding) 104,105, 126, 170, 171,193, 258, 289, 

414, 416, 422,427,428 

Fire 134 

Flavour 56 

Flood & Drain (See Ebb and Flow) 250, 252 

Flower, (See Male and Female for example) 

Flowering times 69, 70, 206, 224, 227, 333 
Fluorescent 151, 153, 229, 230, 235, 238, 422 

Flush 187 - 192,196,304,330 

Foliar Feeding 414 
Forests 117, 120, 141 

Formula 267, 268, 352, 413 

Formulex 259, 260, 309 

Four Twenty (420) 414 

Frequency (See Equilibrium) 148, 349 - 354, 356, 360, 369, 372, 377, 

384- 387 

Frosty (See Trichomes and Crystal) 53, 54, 240 




436 


Fungicide 414,317 

Gall 415 

Ganja 415 

Genetic migration 371, 372 
Gene Pairs 346 

Gene pool 350,351, 365, 366, 371 - 374, 379, 381, 383,386, 388 
General hydroponics Flora 261 

Genes 62, 343, 344, 346- 348, 350, 352, 354, 355, 372, 373, 379, 387, 

415 

Genetic drift 371,372 

Genetically engineered (GM) 48 

Genotype 344, 355 - 358, 361, 363 - 365, 367, 369, 373 - 375, 377, 378 - 380, 
415 

Germination 69,80, 81, 96, 100- 107, 109, 110, 123, 129, 167,238, 263,278, 
281, 304, 332, 415,419 
Gibrellic acid 390 

Glabrous 415 

Glands 51 -55, 90, 400, 401, 406, 408, 409, 415 
Glass 97, 120, 146, 205, 403 - 405, 408, 412 

Gnats 322 

Government 31, 33, 48, 135, 

Grafting 415 

Grass 415 

Greenhouse 103, 120, 

Ground coffee 193 

Groundhog 317 

Grow Dan 244 

Guerrilla Growing 77, 116, 120, 121, 123, 138 - 141, 278, 304 

Habitat 415 

Halogen 152, 153 

Hamsters 381 

Hard Water 269 

Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (see Equilibrium) 

Harvest 37 - 41, 54, 56, 60, 61, 69, 89, 90, 93, 114, 137, 138, 141, 

224, 226, 238, 239, 268, 287, 289, 324, 333 - 336, 340, 402 
Hash/Hashish 40, 48, 49, 50, 51, 54, 127, 336, 374, 375, 380, 400, 401, 403 - 407, 
409-411. 

Hawaiian 391, 395, 398 

Haze 137, 341, 356, 374, 375, 382, 391, 396 - 398 




437 


Head high 56, 59 

Heat (See Temperature) 103, 158, 184, 198, 199, 237, 336, 410, 418, 425 
Height 43 - 45, 60 - 62, 84, 184, 203, 207, 208, 226, 232, 235, 241, 290, 302, 

308, 361 

Hemp 28, 48, 415 

Herb 22, 24, 30, 224, 415, 430 

Hermaphrodite (See Hermie) 37, 212, 216, 388, 390, 

Hermphrodite, Pictures 213, 214, 

Heterozygous 344, 354, 355, 357, 360 - 364, 367 - 370, 375 - 376, 383, 384 

HID (High Intensity Discharge) 149, 154, 155, 158 - 161, 225, 229, 235, 304, 412, 

415, 422, 423 

High Pressure Sodium (HPS): 99, 155, 156, 159, 161, 163, 229 - 231, 241, 415, 418 

Himalayas 26 

Hippy 117 

History 25, 27, 30, 35, 110, 245, 304 
Holland 30,47 

Homozygous (See IBL) 343 - 369, 373, 375, 376, 378, 381 - 384 
Hookah 64 - 66, 415 

Hormone 103, 109, 312, 428, 429 

HPS (See High Pressure Sodium) 

Humidity 198,419 

Humus 175, 176, 415 

Hybrid 58, 341, 342, 366, 368, 382, 415 

Hydroponics 107, 143, 225, 234, 244, 247 - 250, 254, 257, 258, 260, 261, 263, 

264 - 266, 268, 270, 282, 293, 304, 307, 311, 332, 415 
IBL (In Breed Line) 339, 341, 342, 374, 380, 381, 

Incandescent 150 

Indica 42, 44, 56, 58 - 60, 62, 81, 91, 162, 168, 182, 298, 334, 335, 349, 350, 

390, 391,412-416, 421,427 
Infection 416 

Inflorescence 413 

Influence 31,46,60,372,417,418 

Inhale 401,420 

Inoculum 416 

Insecticide 316 

Insects 97,316,418 

Internet 63,64,69,211,317,388 

Internodes 43 - 45, 221, 416 

Ionic 261 




438 


Iron 

195,330, 331,410 

Joint 

328,407,412,416 

Kief 

416 

Larvae 

319,325 

Law 

9, 22, 28, 74, 135, 183, 353, 354, 371, 381, 386, 429 

Leaf, Pictures of 43, 44 

Leaf Hopper 

319 

Lee, Bruce 

30 

Lemon peels 

193 

Lesion 

416 

Life cycle 

21, 38, 80, 88, 110, 167, 186, 221, 238, 267, 304, 412 

Lights (See HID) 

Light proof 

211,241,273, 

Light Rail 

242 

Loam 

109, 175, 176, 285,416 

Lobe 

416 

Lockout 

196, 331 

Locus 

345 - 347 

Logistics 

93,94 

Lumens 

160 - 164, 304, 416 

Magnesium 

195,330, 420 

Male, Picture of 219,128 

Manganese 

330 

Manual hydroponics Pots 250, 257 

Manure 

176,416 

Margin 

416 

Marigolds 

315 

Maturity 

37, 88, 90, 200, 206, 207, 278, 333 

Mealy Bugs 

324 

Medical 

9, 29, 30, 34 

Medium 

102, 107, 131, 167, 172, 176, 205, 225, 232, 244, 245, 248, 252 - 254, 

263, 268, 273, 308, 309, 311, 312, 313, 331, 335, 410, 418, 420, 426 

Mendel, Gregor 364 - 366, 368 

Metal Halide (MH) 155, 156, 159, 416 

Mercury Vapour (MV): 155 

Microns 

403 

Micronutrients 109, 195, 416, 428 

Mirror 

164, 165, 405, 406, 408 

Mites 

78, 126, 321 




439 


Molybdenum 195,331 

Mongolia 26 

Mother 95, 226, 306 - 308, 346, 349, 385, 386, 387, 390, 417 

Mottle 417 

Mould 233,292 

Mud 171,189,191,426 

Mutation 212,332,351,371,417 

Mylar 165, 166, 211, 238, 241, 423 

Native 402,417 

Natruim Hydroxide 391 

Natural selection 352, 371 - 373, 386 

Nematicide 417 

Nematode 417 

Nepal 390 

NFT Nutrient Film Technique 250 
Nitrogen 170, 194, 267, 329, 330, 417 

Node 35, 36, 43 - 45, 84, 202, 203, 207, 288, 299, 301, 308, 312, 417 

Non-random mating 371, 372, 386 

NPK 109, 110, 170, 194, 196, 197, 279, 417 

Nutrients (See Feeding and Fertilizers) 126, 169, 170, 173, 178, 185, 186, 195, 196, 

197,202,245,248,251 - 254,257, 

258 - 264, 267 - 270, 273, 274, 276, 287, 
304, 331,415 -417,426 

Odour 133,242 

Offspring 339, 341, 343, 344, 347, 349, 357, 359 - 363, 365 - 369, 371, 377, 

382 - 387,415 
Optimal growth 52, 426 

Organic 176, 413, 415 - 417, 

Osmosis 417 

Over-Watering 178, 183, 184, 192, 330, 322 

Ozone Generator 132, 133, 242 

Paraquat 417 

Parasite 415 - 417, 420 

Pathogen 412, 416, 417 

Peat moss 417 

Peduncle 417 

Perennial 417 

Perforation 177,178,251 

Perianth 417 




440 


Pesticides 78,282,314,323,326 

Pests 78, 123, 138, 175, 282, 290, 314, 325, 326 

pH 109, 169, 170, 186, 187, 190 - 194, 202, 264 -266, 269, 281, 304, 

329, 331,412,418,426 

Phenotype (See Characteristics) 344, 345, 355, 356, 363, 365, 375, 379, 380, 381, 

415 

Phosphorous 170 
Photoperiod 59,212,390,418 
Photosynthesis 418 
Phototropism 418 
Phyllotaxy 418 
Pinching 418 

Pistil 86, 90, 128, 213, 221, 222, 224, 333, 418, 419, 425 

PMP (potency monitoring project 48 

Pollen 86, 88, 90, 97, 98, 128, 213, 216, 221, 222, 340, 372, 373, 385, 386, 387, 

388,401,418,419 

Pollinate 37, 38, 55, 88 - 90, 96, 212, 216, 217, 222, 340, 341, 357, 387, 388, 418, 
419 

Pots (See Container) 107, 108, 123, 135, 141, 167, 177, 178, 180, 181, 183, 189, 190, 

191, 194, 226, 248, 249, 257, 258, 263, 273 - 275, 281, 292, 301, 
331,427 

Potassium 170, 194, 267, 330, 417 
PotBound (See Rootbound) 331 

Potency 9, 35, 46 - 48, 50 - 52, 54, 56, 62, 127, 149, 207, 279, 288, 305, 337, 
339, 343, 355, 380, 393, 403, 418, 423 
Powder bugs 316 
Power Gro 261 
Precipitation 259, 261 
Predator 138,282,314,315,318,418 
Pre-flowering 84, 202, 203, 205, 206, 209, 210, 212, 217 
Pressing 406 

Price 65, 104, 258 

Propagation 93, 94, 100 - 103, 110, 125, 304 
Pruning 62, 291, 294, 295, 297 - 302, 418 
Psychoactive 46, 413, 420 

Pump 133, 158, 162, 163, 248, 251, 252, 254, 257, 272 - 276 

Punnet square 358, 362, 365, 366, 368, 369 

Purple 343, 349, 365, 380 

Pyrethrum 316 




441 


Rabbits 

316 

Racy 

290, 291 

Radiation 

147, 148,371,417 

Recessive 

345, 347 

Red light 

418 

Reefer 

418 

Reflector 

144.146, 154, 164, 423 

Re-flowering 

38 

Reservoir 

248, 251, 252, 254, 261 - 263, 266, 269, 270, 275 

Resin 

29, 37, 46, 51, 52, 54, 55, 90, 222, 333, 334, 400, 401, 402, 406, 408, 
412,415,417,419, 425 

Resistance 

418,420 

Re-veging 

38,39 

Reverse Osmosis 269 

rH (See Humidty) 

Ripp 

66,117,118,119 

Roach 

419 

Rockwool 

100, 102 - 104, 107, 126, 205, 244, 246, 259, 263, 264, 273, 309, 311, 

312 

Root 

35, 38, 39, 81, 102, 104, 105, 107 - 109, 123, 126, 169, 172, 174, 177, 

180, 190, 191, 197, 226, 244, 245, 247 - 249, 251, 252, 254, 257, 263, 

275, 276, 281, 286, 308 - 313, 331, 412 - 415, 419 

Root Bound 

331 

Rot 

419 

Ruderalis 

42, 45, 59, 127 

Rust 

269, 292, 419 

Safer's soap 

320 

Salt 

195, 197,321,330, 331,416 

Sand 

173, 175,248,416 

Sativa 

42, 43, 56, 58 - 60, 62, 67 - 69, 91, 114, 162, 277, 298, 299, 334, 335, 

349, 350, 356, 392, 396, 397, 398, 419, 427 

Scale 

141, 169, 324,413,419 

Scorch 

419 

Screens 

228, 232,233 - 235, 403 - 408 

ScrOG (Screen Of Green) 144, 225, 227 - 229, 231 - 235, 241, 249, 290, 293, 302, 

304 

Scuff 

129 

Seaweed 

266 

Secondary nutrients 123, 194 - 197, 334, 348, 400, 428 




442 


Security 65, 77, 117, 123, 130, 132, 135, 138, 141, 167, 304 
Seed-bank 12, 47, 63 - 69, 131, 135, 167, 203, 216 - 218, 363, 373, 378, 423, 

424 

Seedling 81, 82, 93, 102, 104 - 107, 110, 114, 123, 155, 156, 171, 181, 281, 284, 
420 

Seeds 9, 35, 37, 38, 45, 48, 57, 63 - 67, 69, 71, 78, 81, 88, 93, 94, 96, 98, 

100 - 107, 109, 110, 122, 125, 129, 131, 167, 204, 212, 216 -218, 243, 
259, 278, 279, 281, 304, 307, 326, 333, 339 - 342, 355, 357, 363, 

365, 366, 367, 378, 382, 387 - 389, 391, 393, 423, 424, 430 
Selfing (Self-pollination) 388 
Senescent 419 

Sepal 419 

Serrated 419 

Sexing 204, 205, 304 

Shavings 402,406 

Shock (see Stress) 102, 109, 192, 213 
Shoots 299,301,414 

Silk 403, 404, 405 

Silt 173, 175 

Sinsemilla 89, 216, 222, 373 

Skuff 402,405 -411,416,419 

Skunk 25, 69, 70, 132, 342, 350, 380, 391, 419 

Slugs 321 

Snail 321 

SOG (Sea of Green) 144, 225, 226, 228, 229, 232 - 234, 241, 289, 290, 302, 304 
Soil 172 

Species (See Indica, Sativa and Ruderalis) 

Spiciform 419 

Spider mites 78,106,126 

Spliff 419 

Squaring 384,384 

Stake 82, 293, 419 

Stalked capitate trichomes 400, 401 

Stamen 412,419 

Stash 419 

Stem 35, 39, 82, 84, 106, 108, 180, 182, 188, 203, 205, 248, 288, 294, 297, 

299, 302, 303, 309, 312, 314, 316, 317, 343, 401, 402, 413 - 418, 425 
Stem Break 303 

Sterile (See Clean) 175, 309 




443 


Stimuli 56 

Stipule 419 

Stoma 419 

Stout 420 

Strains 393 


Street cannabis 34, 403, 411 

Stress (See Shock) 28, 78, 212, 216, 217, 331, 390, 391, 425 

Substrate 417,420 

Sugar 289 

Sulphur 195 

Switzerland 29 

Taxa 420 

TDS meter 261, 262 

Temperatures 26, 158, 198, 199, 425 

Terminal 420 

Test Cross 355, 357, 361, 363, 367, 377, 378 


Tetrahydrocannabinol (see THC) 

Textile industry 27 
Thai stick 420 

THC 28, 37, 38, 46 - 48, 50, 54, 55, 59, 112, 127, 222, 304, 336, 337, 400, 418, 

420 


THCV 46 


Thermometer 199 


Thieves (see Ripp) 

Thinning 290 - 292, 194, 420, 

Thread 82, 106, 126, 189, 293, 302, 346 

Tied 82, 178, 262, 293, 335 

Timer 47,144- 147,154,211 

Toke 420 

Towel 101, 102 

Training 302 

Traits (See phenotype) 

Transpiration 420 

Transplant 93, 102, 107 - 110, 167, 171, 181, 281, 304, 322, 420 
Trichomes 51 - 53, 55, 400 - 403, 405, 408, 409 
Trim 303, 334 - 336, 402, 403, 406, 408, 411 

True breeding (See IBL and Homozygous) 

Termites 322 

Twisting 330 




444 


Uniform growth 


290, 342, 365, 373, 378, 380 - 382, 386, 387, 416 


Urine 315,318 

Variations 229, 231, 234, 334, 342, 365, 371, 376, 381, 383 

Vascular 266, 419, 420 

Vegetative 69, 70, 80, 83, 106, 107, 155, 156, 180 - 182, 184, 197, 202, 203, 207, 
211, 213, 233, 243, 267, 282, 288, 294, 298, 300 - 302, 329 
Veins 330 

Vent 157, 158, 237 

Vermiculite 420 
Viable 65, 88, 106, 340 

Vims 420 

Waste material 178,186 

Watering, indoor 183 

Watering, Outdoor 285 

Wattage 144 
Weeds 278 - 284 

Whitefly 320 
Whorl 413,421 

Wild 27, 213, 378 

Wilt 183,285,421 

Wilt Fungus 317 

Wind (see Air) 26, 106, 133, 135, 200, 418, 425 
Window 112, 113, 114, 133, 197, 199, 238, 310 

Wire 138, 228, 232 

Withering 195,329 
Woodchuck 315 

Yields 225, 241, 282, 292, 304, 305, 427, 428, 429 

ZERO ZERO 48,50,409 
Zinc 195,331 

Zonked 421 




445 


THE GREEN PAGES 


Here are some great resources for cannabis related material 
that you may want to check out. They come highly 

recommended. 



Ph: 253.SS0.5225 Fn; 253.854.4169 
lnro@yappieplpe.CMjn 

Mori Design, 4044 Auburn way N.#4, 
Auburn, WA 98002, USA 


A great shop to check out for the latest in 
pipe and pipe designs. The RayDiaTor is a new 
water-cooled pipe. Check it out at 
Yuppiepipe.com! 






446 



A great place to shop for great strains on the 
market today. Send an E-mail to chimera for the 
latest stock list and price! 



Want to hang out and chat with fellow growers 
from around the world? Check out 
!!!!!! www.overgrow.com !!!!! 












447 



The Guide to Marijuana on the Internet 

If-t iv unite as one voice, we will be heard! 

A great source for the latest information on 
cannabis news! www.yahooka.com 



448 



A Calyx. The ultimate Pre-flowering indicator. 
Illustration by strawdog. 








449 


Disclaimer 


The materials presented in this publication are distributed by the publisher for information 
purposes only. The information is provided solely on the basis that readers will be responsible 
for making their own assessments of the subjects discussed and are advised to verify all 
relevant representations, statements, information and obtain independent advice, including 
legal advice, before acting on any of the information contained in or in connection with this 
publication. 

Although every care has been taken to provide information that is suitable for this publication 
we can not accept responsibility for unsuitable, incomplete or inaccurate material that may be 
contained in this publication. 

We make no claim as to the accuracy of the information in this publication, or the accuracy of 
the information provided by third parties connected to this publication. 

Whilst every effort has been made to ensure that the information is accurate, we will not 
accept any liability for any losses or damages which may be incurred by any person acting in 
reliance upon the information. 


The Cannabis Grow Bible 
© Copyright 2001, Greg Green 
All rights reserved. 

No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or 
otherwise, without written permission from the author. 


